[Congressional Record Volume 171, Number 13 (Wednesday, January 22, 2025)]
[House]
[Page H262]
From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov]




                      PUTTING ALL AMERICANS FIRST

  The SPEAKER pro tempore. The Chair recognizes the gentlewoman from 
California (Ms. Kamlager-Dove) for 5 minutes.
  Ms. KAMLAGER-DOVE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to urge Donald Trump to 
truly put America first by setting politics aside and providing 
California with the disaster relief we urgently need and deserve. Let's 
do that by fighting for California, home to close to 40 million people 
who also live in America.
  Just a few weeks ago, big, bad fires broke out across Los Angeles 
County. Donald Trump's first instinct was to point fingers at 
California leaders for fires caused not by them but by Mother Nature 
herself and climate change. For the record, California has a lot of 
things, but one thing we do not have is a big old sink that can water 
the entire State.
  Now, Trump wants to be a unifier. He claims he wants to put America 
first, so let's talk about what America First genuinely means.
  America First does not involve placing conditions on disaster aid to 
Americans simply because of how a State voted.
  America First does not mean leaving thousands of people without 
housing amid an ongoing housing crisis.

  America First does not look like insurance companies robbing people 
or putting shareholders first.
  What putting America first does mean, however, is passing disaster 
aid without conditions because, as Americans, we help each other when 
we are in need. At least, I thought that is what we do.
  America First means build and rebuild. Build, baby, rebuild, swiftly 
and fairly, so no one remains unhoused.
  America First means making insurance plans accessible to everyone, 
not just the rich and those properties that are considered low risk.
  Mr. Trump, the individuals impacted by the fires in Los Angeles are 
not just, as you put it, ``the wealthiest and most powerful individuals 
in our country'' who were present at your inauguration. These are real 
people--grandparents, parents, children, and grandchildren, working, 
middle-class individuals--who have lost everything.
  News flash, Donald Trump, many of them voted for you.
  Let's support them and not just the wealthy few. That is how we truly 
put America first.
  The SPEAKER pro tempore. Members are reminded to direct their remarks 
to the Chair and not to a perceived viewing audience.

                          ____________________

