[Congressional Record Volume 171, Number 4 (Wednesday, January 8, 2025)]
[Senate]
[Pages S46-S60]
From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov]




                   LAKEN RILEY ACT--Motion To Proceed


                   Recognition of the Minority Leader

  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Democratic leader is recognized.


                             119th Congress

  Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, today, President-elect Donald Trump comes 
to the Capitol to meet with Senate Republicans. We expect they will 
talk about their first order of business when they assume full control 
of government.
  And what is the Republicans' first order of business going to be?
  Will it be helping working people as Donald Trump promised on the 
campaign trail? Will it be increasing paychecks or strengthening 
workers' rights or making healthcare more affordable? Will it be 
investing in more American manufacturing jobs, like Democrats did 3 
years ago?
  No, no--and, again, no. Donald Trump and Republicans promised to 
fight for working Americans, but their actions already tell a different 
story.
  Before even entering office, Donald Trump is working with Republicans 
to give very wealthy people and megacorporations another round of 
trillion-dollar tax cuts. At the same time that Americans are 
struggling with inadequate childcare and not

[[Page S47]]

enough healthcare and the inability to buy a home, these Republicans 
are talking about helping the megacorporations and wealthy people get 
tax cuts.
  Many of them are saying: Let's cut Social Security. Let's cut 
Medicare. Let's cut healthcare. Let's cut the ability of a first-time 
homeowner to buy a home, to pay for it.
  So instead of working in a bipartisan way to put the needs of working 
Americans first, Republicans are getting ready to use the 
reconciliation process to reward the richest Americans and give more 
tax breaks to America's biggest corporations.
  It is obscene enough that Republicans want to make tax cuts for the 
ultrarich their first agenda item, but it gets worse when you remember 
they already cut taxes for those same people just a few years ago, and 
we all saw what a disaster it was.
  The last time Donald Trump and Republicans cut taxes for the rich, 
they claimed it would trickle down to the working people, to the middle 
class. It most certainly did not. Republicans promised that the average 
household would see $4,000 extra per year, but, in fact, real median 
wages grew less than half of a half of a percent--less than half of a 
half of a percent--in the 2 years following these tax cuts. Executive 
pay and bonuses, meanwhile, soared to record highs. Stock buybacks, 
which only reward shareholders, hit a record in 2018.
  After the Trump tax cuts went into effect, the highest income earners 
in America paid less, effectively, in taxes than the working class for 
the first time ever. Imagine that. The highest income earners paid 
less, effectively, in taxes than the working class for the first time 
ever after the first Trump tax cut, and Republicans want to repeat that 
performance?
  According to one study by economists at the University of California, 
the richest 400 families paid a lower tax rate than the bottom half of 
U.S. households in 2018. The richest 400 families paid a lower rate 
than the bottom half of U.S. households in 2018--paid a lesser amount, 
I believe.
  There is nothing--nothing--pro-worker about cutting taxes for the 
wealthiest people in America, but that is precisely what Republicans 
are preparing to do as one of their first orders of business. They are 
not debating whether they should do it, just what is the best way to do 
it--one bill; two bills; choose your poison.
  We already see a clear difference between the way Republicans are 
preparing to govern and how Democrats governed when we had the 
majority. We put bipartisanship first. We never made party-line votes 
the only part of our main agenda, as Republicans seem prepared to do.
  Let's not forget--in the first year of the Democrats' majority, one 
of our signature bills was a bipartisan effort to rebuild America's 
roads, bridges, and highways, to put people to work, and fix our 
infrastructure. That is putting workers first.
  In 2022, Democrats led a bipartisan effort to bring manufacturing 
back to our shores, to make America the world leader in microchip 
production once again, to plant the seeds for good-paying tech jobs at 
America's heartland. That is putting workers first.
  In 2023, we even led a bipartisan effort to fix our immigration 
system with the strongest--the strongest--border security bill in over 
a decade. That was a bipartisan bill. We were hours away from voting on 
the bill here in the Senate before Donald Trump killed it for no other 
reason than a cynical political game.
  So it is troubling that so far, we have seen little indication from 
the Republican majority that they are interested in continuing the 
bipartisan streak of the last 4 years or that they are really 
interested in helping the working people of America in any way. 
Instead, Republicans seem ready to use their majority to go back to the 
same old GOP playbook: tax cuts for the ultrarich, trickle-down 
fantasies, and turning their backs on working Americans whom they 
promised to fight for.


                              Nominations

  Mr. President, now on nominations, every time a new administration 
begins, one of the most important things the Senate does is carefully 
evaluate, consider, and vote on the President's Cabinet nominees. 
Strong nominees only come from a strong vetting process here in the 
Senate.
  I have been very clear where Democrats stand. We need thorough 
background investigations, we need hearings where both sides can 
prepare to ask strong questions, and we need a vote here on the floor. 
In other words, we expect regular order. It is deeply troubling, then, 
to see our Republican colleagues already beginning to shun regular 
order.
  Yesterday, the chairman of the Committee on Energy and Natural 
Resources noticed a hearing for Governor Doug Burgum to serve as the 
next Secretary of the Interior without minority consent, as has long 
been the standard practice. Senate Democrats on the committee expressed 
reasonable objections to proceeding to this hearing because the 
committee had not yet received basic information on Governor Burgum's 
background.
  What are Republicans trying to hide by rushing this and other 
nominees through committee? It is very reasonable to wait a little, get 
additional background information so both sides can be ready for the 
hearing. Why the rush? Are Republicans trying to hide the fact that 
maybe some of Donald Trump's nominees are not qualified for the 
positions they seek? Are Republicans trying to cover for nominees who 
will turn their backs on working Americans and use Agencies like the 
Department of the Interior to help giant polluters and Big Business?
  The American people should know if Cabinet nominees will push 
policies that kill good-paying clean energy jobs created under 
President Biden. These are good-paying jobs that support communities in 
red States and blue States. Repealing these jobs would be profoundly 
anti-worker and might cause many to lose their jobs.
  Americans deserve to know what kind of people are going to serve in 
President Trump's Cabinet. They need assurances that these nominees 
will fight for them, will cut costs, and hold the big corporations 
accountable.
  When Republicans try to rush nominees through the process, the 
American people have to wonder what are Republicans trying to hide.


                             Gulf of Mexico

  Mr. President, now finally, I want to make a brief comment about the 
President-elect's press conference yesterday.
  Donald Trump throws out a lot of strange and rather random ideas on a 
regular basis. He did it yesterday when suggesting we rename the Gulf 
of Mexico the ``Gulf of America.''
  Well, let me say this: I would agree working with Donald Trump on 
renaming the Gulf of Mexico only if he first agrees to work with us on 
an actual plan to lower costs for Americans. That is what the American 
people want us to focus on first, not on renaming bodies of water.
  Our priorities--our Democratic priorities--are so much more closely 
aligned with the concerns of the American people than Donald Trump's 
seem to be.
  The incoming President knows he has a tall task ahead of him. He 
spent years on the campaign trail making outlandish promises he won't 
be able to keep. In fact, he is getting ready to do the opposite of 
what he promised by cutting taxes for the very, very wealthy.
  Donald Trump is in over his head, so he is doing what he always does 
in times like this: distract America with crazy ideas.
  Renaming the Gulf of Mexico may be a zany new idea, but it isn't 
going to help people save money at the grocery store; it is not going 
to make trips to the pharmacy more affordable; it is not going to help 
anyone find a good-paying job. Donald Trump says these things because 
it will get him attention and make him sound like a tough guy.
  If Donald Trump wants to rename an ocean to sound more patriotic, I 
would say we will help him on one condition and only on one condition: 
Let's come up with a real plan first--not a concept of a plan--to lower 
prices for Americans. Let's do that first. Then Donald Trump can have 
his fun.
  I yield the floor.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The majority whip.


                          Biden Administration

  Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, 2 months ago, the American people gave 
Republicans a clear mandate. It is a

[[Page S48]]

mandate to get America back on track. Senate Republicans won 53 seats. 
In the House of Representatives, Republicans are in the majority. And 
President Trump won a historic victory. He won all seven of the 
battleground States, and he won the popular vote. The victory was 
decisive. Starting this week, Republicans are going to begin to deliver 
on the mandate.
  You just heard the minority leader in the Senate talk about what 
Republicans are going to do to help the American people. I want to talk 
about that because I want to contrast it to what the outgoing President 
is doing right now in his final days in office.
  The Democrat President who is leaving is trying to put in place 
leftwing, dangerous policies--policies that have been rejected by the 
American voters and policies that are going to make it more expensive 
for American voters to live their lives. These policies will make 
America less safe, less prosperous, and more vulnerable. These aren't 
policies the American people voted for.
  It seems that the lameduck President is working overtime to undermine 
the American values and the demands and the wishes of the American 
people. The outgoing President has actually had his administration sign 
contracts with government unions so government workers have the right 
to stay home from work, maybe pretending that they are working, while 
still getting paid for a job that they are supposed to be doing.
  To make matters worse, this past Monday, Joe Biden banned American 
energy production on 625 million acres of Federal waters. The Democrat 
leader says: Well, we need to do things to lower prices for the 
American people. That is not going to do it. That is going to make it 
more expensive for the American people when they use energy to heat 
their home and to drive their vehicles.
  Joe Biden and the Democrats are using an obscure law to sabotage 
American energy independence and American energy production. In the 
process of doing this, all in the name of the environment and climate, 
they are going to make it much harder for the American people to make 
ends meet at the end of the month.
  In my home State of Wyoming, the Biden administration issued a 
midnight rule that limits agriculture production and oil and gas 
leasing in Wyoming on public lands. He did this over the objections of 
the people of Wyoming. This is one more insult from this outgoing 
administration to the families and the workers in my home State.
  So it is not surprising that Joe Biden continues to do more damage as 
he shuffles out the door. Under his administration, punishing 
regulations have replaced common sense. His war on American energy 
independence has hurt us strategically and has caused prices to go up 
dramatically. On the whole, he has been the most anti-American energy 
President in the history of this country.
  Sadly, there are plenty more examples of malicious sabotage by this 
lameduck President. In December, what did we learn? We learned that the 
Biden administration was selling off materials purchased to build the 
wall at our southern border. It sold the materials for pennies on the 
dollar. Bidding began at $5. This is vindictive and an illegal 
violation of U.S. law.
  Joe Biden and Democrats let more than 10 million illegal immigrants 
cross our border illegally into our country. Among them, we know, were 
over 300 individuals on the Terror Watchlist.
  So this morning, when the Democrat leader says ``What are the 
Republicans doing? What are you starting out doing?'' Well, this week, 
we are going to be voting on the Laken Riley bill. She was a young 
woman--an innocent young woman--murdered by an illegal immigrant who 
came across into this country illegally. She was murdered. It is a bill 
that has been sponsored and cosponsored by every Republican in the 
Senate, and now I am happy to report that there are several Democrats 
who have also signed on to that legislation.
  We are now talking about something that should have been done in a 
bipartisan way earlier, but we have an opportunity this week to get a 
bill passed in the Senate that is absolutely bipartisan and would make 
a huge difference in trying to protect American citizens from illegal 
immigrants who are in this country. We are talking about a group of at 
least 10 million, some of whom are members of criminal cartels, drug 
dealers, people on the Terrorist Watchlist. Yet, by Joe Biden's actions 
of selling off materials that taxpayers have paid for--pennies on the 
dollar--he is now making it harder and more expensive for President 
Trump to do the job at the border that he was elected to do and for 
which Joe Biden and his party were rejected at the ballot box.
  This week, we also see that Joe Biden is rushing to release 
terrorists from American custody. One week after the New Orleans 
terrorist attack, this President has set free 11 terrorists from 
Guantanamo Bay--terrorists connected to the 9/11 attacks on America.
  The Wall Street Journal reported yesterday that Joe Biden wants to 
give back a dangerous terrorist and close friend of Osama bin Laden.
  Here at home, we are seeing another type of Joe Biden jailbreak. Last 
month, the President pardoned 39 convicts and commuted the sentences of 
nearly 1,500 more--more commutations in a single day than the last 
three Presidents combined. These people are hardened criminals. They 
include murderers, child abusers, fraudsters, con artists, and corrupt 
public officials.
  This ugly action was a disregard for the victims, for their families, 
and for the facts, and a slap in the face of every law-abiding citizen. 
This abuse of power undermines our justice system and the power of the 
Presidency.
  This week, Joe Biden continued his march of shame by giving America's 
highest civilian honor to George Soros. Soros is a pro-crime activist. 
He is a supporter--an active supporter--of defunding the police. George 
Soros spent $50 million to elect soft-on-crime prosecutors, including 
the partisan New York City district attorney Alvin Bragg. Biden 
rewarded Soros for funding the lawyers who launched the legal attacks 
against his political opponent, President Trump.
  In his final days in office now, Joe Biden is making America less 
safe, less prosperous, and more vulnerable. This is the opposite of 
what the American people voted for in November.
  There was a column in the opinion page of yesterday's Washington Post 
Magazine. This is a reflection, an opinion of individuals on what 
legacy there is going to be for Joe Biden. Presidents are concerned 
about their legacy. This is by Matt Bai, called ``Biden's legacy: A 
bridge to nowhere.'' And pulled out on the big line is: Joe Biden 
``will be chiefly remembered . . . as a man who didn't know when to 
leave''--``a man who didn't know when to leave.'' Joe Biden's shelf 
life has expired. It is time for him to go.
  In our first days in office, Republicans have started to get America 
back on track. Working with President Trump, we will put our focus on 
what the American people care about: stopping the chaos at the border, 
taking the handcuffs off of American energy production, and putting the 
safety and the security and the future of all Americans first.
  I yield the floor.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Democratic whip.


                        Remembering Jimmy Carter

  Mr. DURBIN. Mr. President, for many Presidents, their legacy is 
written and sealed by their actions in office--their post-Presidency 
activities nothing but fodder for the tabloids and a footnote in 
history books--but not for Jimmy Carter.
  I remember the last days of the Carter Presidency. After 444 painful 
days of sustained and frustrating efforts to release American hostages 
being held in Tehran, we witnessed their welcome, but cynically timed, 
release on the last day of our Nation's peaceful transfer of power from 
President Carter to President Reagan.
  President Carter's main goal had been to make sure that every hostage 
returned home alive. On that score, he succeeded.
  Leaving office at 56 years of age and passing away at the end of last 
month at 100, President Jimmy Carter had the longest post-Presidency in 
our Nation's history, and he certainly made it count. The same faith, 
empathy, and desire to help others that motivated him to run for office 
compelled him to continue improving the world after he left office. Not 
content with a rocking-

[[Page S49]]

chair retirement, President Carter devoted himself to human rights, 
conflict resolution, election monitoring, healthcare, affordable 
housing, and so much more.
  He was a humble man in a world of politics where humility is often 
the first casualty. But there is no doubt that in corners of the globe 
near and far, Jimmy Carter left his mark. A public servant can ask for 
no greater legacy.
  As our 39th President lies in state in the U.S. Capitol, just a few 
steps away from this Chamber, before he is laid to final rest, it is a 
time for paying respects and reflecting. President Carter's legacy 
tasks each one of us with looking inward and asking: How can I use my 
place in life to do more good for more people?
  Today, I send my thoughts to all those who knew, loved, or were 
inspired by President Carter. Our Nation and world are better off 
because of his service. May he rest in peace.
  I yield the floor.
  I suggest the absence of a quorum.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will call the roll.
  The bill clerk proceeded to call the roll.
  Mr. CORNYN. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for 
the quorum call be rescinded.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered.


                             119th Congress

  Mr. CORNYN. Mr. President, with the new session of the Senate and a 
new majority in the House and the Senate--actually, the House had the 
majority but the Senate has a new majority--and President Trump in the 
White House, one of the first things that Members of the Senate had to 
do is to choose which committees to serve on.
  I have been proud to serve on the Senate Judiciary, Finance, and 
Intelligence Committee in previous Congresses. This Congress, I will be 
joining the Budget Committee for the 119th Congress. I was particularly 
interested in joining the Budget Committee because one of the biggest 
challenges we have is to get our budget under control. With approaching 
$36 trillion in debt, we are paying more interest on the national debt 
than we are on defense. At a time when President Trump asked NATO to up 
their investment in their own defense to up to 5 percent of GDP, we 
stand about 2.7 percent of GPD here at home.
  Clearly, we need to rightsize our spending and our debt and 
reprioritize what it is we are trying to do here. National security, I 
believe, is the preeminent responsibility of the U.S. Congress.
  We will have the opportunity to pass a budget with reconciliation 
instructions. I am not sure how much the American people care about the 
process. We care about the process because we have to deal with it. But 
the first thing we do have to do is pass a budget. That is something we 
haven't done since 2017. I remember in 2017, right after President 
Trump was sworn or even before he was sworn into office, we passed a 
budget resolution from which we got the ability to then pass the Tax 
Cuts and Jobs Act, one of the most significant tax reform bills in 25 
years.
  But we got that budget passed before President Trump even took office 
because, as a resolution between the House and the Senate, it doesn't 
require a Presidential signature. It is already January 8. We have 12 
days until President Trump puts his hand on the Bible and is sworn into 
his second term of office, and we don't have any time to waste.
  The reason why a budget is so important is for a variety of reasons. 
But one reason is because it allows us to pass budgetary legislation 
using the majority threshold, which would allow Republicans alone--
hopefully, Democrats will join us, but with 53 Republicans and 
everybody on the same page, hopefully, we will be able to pass 
legislation addressing our budgetary challenges.
  We do have unique rules here in the Senate. One is called the Byrd 
rule, which tries to make sure we don't use the reconciliation process 
and the budgetary process to pass substantive legislation as opposed to 
budgetary legislation. That is something we are going to have to work 
out with the House because I know the House has different rules. They 
don't have any constraint on the types of things that they can do using 
reconciliation like the Senate does. But that is the reason why it is 
so important for the House and the Senate to get on the same page.
  There is some discussion here on Capitol Hill about whether we want 
to pass one budget or two budgets or more--actually, even one budget 
with multiple reconciliation bills. Frankly, I don't think the process 
is as important as it is to get the job done. We need to save the 
American people a multitrillion-dollar tax increase which will occur 
unless we can renew the expiring provisions of the Tax Cuts and Jobs 
Act.
  As I indicated earlier, we need to deal with our rising debt and our 
funding for our national security purposes. The goal, of course, for 
national security funding is to establish deterrence and to deter--
whether it is Iran that has aspirations for nuclear weapons that has 
created so much havoc and misery in the Middle East; whether it is 
North Korea that is testing hypersonic missiles along with nuclear 
weapons; or whether it is Russia, which has aspirations to restore the 
former Soviet Union or Russian Empire currently by the means of taking 
Ukraine back. Then, there is China, which--as the Presiding Officer 
knows with all of his experience in Asia--is a huge challenge for the 
United States.
  President Xi has stated he wants the People's Liberation Army to be 
prepared by 2027 to take Taiwan by whatever means necessary. We are not 
ready, and we have to be ready to maintain and reestablish deterrence 
so that does not happen; so that President Xi wakes up day after day 
and he says to himself, ``Not today.'' And tomorrow he wakes up and 
says, ``Not today.''
  That is what deterrence is about.
  And we, again, need to deal with our budgetary challenges because we 
are not spending the amount of money we need to spend on defense and 
deterrence, nor are we spending the money we do spend in, I believe, 
the wisest and most appropriate manner given the current circumstances.
  So whether we pursue a single reconciliation bill or multiple bills, 
we can't lose sight of the goal, and that is to pass President Trump's 
agenda for the American people. That is what the November 5 election 
was all about. And we are in lockstep with President Trump, I believe--
the majority in the House and the Senate--to accomplish that goal. But 
we can't do it unless we work closely together, which is why we need to 
be on the same page.
  We need to quickly arrive at that agreement so we can act swiftly to 
implement the solutions that will help improve the day-to-day lives of 
our constituents, the people we represent--in my case, 31 million 
people in the State of Texas. President Biden's policies have been a 
disaster for my State and for the American people. Texans have been 
suffering under open borders and high prices for the last 4 years. 
Those who run businesses are facing burdensome regulations from the 
out-of-control regulatory regime.
  On top of this, as I mentioned, if Republicans fail to act swiftly to 
extend the expiring tax cuts, 62 percent of taxpayers will experience a 
tax increase--62 percent. We can't let that happen. It would be insult 
to injury on top of a 40-year-high inflation for the American people to 
have to experience a tax cut increase if we are unsuccessful.
  So while we have important conversations and healthy debates over 
what budget reconciliation ends up looking like, we need to keep our 
eye on the prize in order to deliver on these critical priorities for 
the American people.
  Now, in addition to border security, abundant American energy, 
regulatory reform, permitting reform, and avoiding this multitrillion-
dollar tax increase, there is one more thing that I would like my 
colleagues to remember as we deliberate the contents of this package.
  I believe we have a once-in-a-generation opportunity to deal with 
some of the biggest challenges that face America, and we can't squander 
that opportunity. We have to address not only our discretionary 
spending, which is about 28 percent of what the Federal Government 
spends each year, but also our mandatory spending programs outside of 
Social Security and Medicare. We are not going to touch Social Security 
or Medicare absent some bipartisan agreement.

[[Page S50]]

  But there is still about $700 billion of mandatory spending that the 
Federal Government spends each year that is, essentially, on autopilot. 
We can address these mandatory spending programs by implementing 
commonsense reforms to programs like SNAP--otherwise known as food 
stamps--that have grown unchecked for years. By simply reducing payment 
errors for the SNAP payments, for example, we could save an estimated 
$100 billion.
  By implementing a real work requirement for means-tested programs 
like Congress did back during the Clinton Presidency, we could save an 
incredible amount of money for the American people and help ease 
inflation so that the Federal Reserve can bring down interest rates. Or 
we could repeal the controversial 2021 Thrifty Food Plan that would 
save as much as $300 billion.
  We are talking about real money.
  But it is not just programs that got plus-ups during the pandemic. 
Let's take a look, for example, at the IRS. By rescinding the remaining 
unspent Inflation Reduction Act funds that were directed to the IRS 
during the Democrats' massive spending spree, we could save an 
additional $40 billion.
  Now, think about that for a minute. We could save taxpayers $40 
billion just by sending less money to the Agency when it comes to 
process their tax payments. That seems like a no-brainer if I ever 
heard of one. This money has not been spent.
  If there are other demands in the future that Congress needs to 
address, then we are prepared to act on those. But to simply leave $40 
billion unspent and act as if there is nothing we can do about it at a 
time of sky-high inflation and reckless spending, I think would be 
irresponsible on our part.
  Here is another idea. By repealing Davis-Bacon, a law that requires 
Federal construction projects that are carried out that applies to them 
that requires payment of a prevailing wage--which isn't necessarily a 
market wage at the location you are talking about--the Department of 
Transportation alone could save $400 million.
  Turning to our Federal workforce. Our Federal workforce does, by and 
large, great work. They do important work on behalf of the American 
people. But by reforming the pension system for Federal employees to 
bring the benefit calculation in line with the private sector standard, 
the government could save $5 billion over the next decade. We could 
reform the structure of the Federal employee health benefit program and 
save an additional $18 billion.
  These are just a few examples of what I would call low-hanging fruit 
of the opportunities for us to save taxpayer money and to begin to 
reverse the reckless spending policies of the last 4 years. These are 
just some examples of the longer list that could save taxpayers as much 
as $1 trillion over the next 10-year period.
  And, of course, I think we ought to put it all on the table--the 
money we spend through discretionary spending, the money we spend 
through mandatory programs, the money that is spent through the tax 
code. The child tax credit and the earned income tax credit alone 
represent $200 billion in spending. And this is using the tax code to 
basically create or supplement our welfare system because it is a 
refundable tax credit, which means people get a check--get cold, hard 
cash--using the tax code.
  We need to restore the Tax Code to its original purpose and not 
hijack it for purposes of expanding the welfare state. We can have 
healthy debates about what the priorities should be. I think the child 
tax credit is very important, and we can talk about the appropriate 
levels of all of these various programs, including those included in 
the Tax Code. But we have to start somewhere, and we have to start 
soon.
  Little things do add up. Over the past 4 years, families back home in 
Texas have had to reevaluate their budgets. So why shouldn't the 
Federal Government have to make the hard choices that folks back home 
are making on a daily and weekly basis? They have had to tighten their 
belts as a result of high inflation and the highest interest rates that 
we have had in a long time, which have eaten away at their monthly 
incomes. They have figured it out, and we can figure it out here, too, 
for the American people and for the Federal Government.
  I think it is only fair that the U.S. Congress, which holds the purse 
strings for the U.S. Government as a whole, should have to do the same 
thing that families all across Texas, all across Tennessee, and all 
across the country are having to do on a regular basis. It doesn't seem 
fair to me to have the folks back home have to make these tough choices 
while the Congress has been spending away under Democratic majority 
control and with President Biden in the White House.
  This is another reason I am excited about the great work the 
Republicans are going to do on the DOGE Caucus, the Department of 
Government Efficiency, alongside our friend Elon Musk and his partner 
in crime Vivek Ramaswamy. I say that tongue in cheek, Mr. President. 
But they have volunteered their efforts and raised the visibility and 
profile of some of the massive inefficiency in Federal spending in a 
way that, I think, will be able to galvanize the attention of the 
American people and enable us to get the political courage to do what 
we need to do to cut out waste, fraud, and abuse.
  This Republican-led Congress can make an impact in reducing our 
spending, and I know we are all excited about the opportunities to do 
so. We are chomping at the bit. We just need to all get on the same 
page so we can get down to work. So I would urge all of my colleagues 
to remember budget reconciliation not only allows us to allocate 
resources to places like the southern border, which have been flatout 
ignored by the Biden administration, but it is also a tool to reduce 
spending--inefficient, wasteful spending--and to right-size our 
priorities.
  You know, budgets are all about priorities. We have things we must 
have; we have things we would like to have; and we have things we want 
but that we can't afford. Those are decisions families have to make on 
a regular basis and so do small businesses all across the country. Why 
not the Federal Government? There is no good reason the Federal 
Government shouldn't have to operate under the same rules.
  While we can notch some big wins in the coming weeks, we need to eat 
our spinach too. You know, we have been kicking a lot of these issues 
down the road until now, when we have run out of road. So it is up to 
us, the elected Representatives of the American people. This is our 
responsibility. It is not always going to be fun. It is not necessarily 
always going to be popular, but I believe that, if we explain to the 
American people the necessity of doing what I have been talking about 
here, they will understand it, and they will respect it and accept it. 
After all, this is something I propose that we do--that we have to do--
because of what the American people told us that they want, which is a 
change in direction for the country, in their vote of November 5 of 
this last year.
  I yield the floor.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Virginia.


                         Birthright Citizenship

  Mr. KAINE. Mr. President, I spoke on the Senate floor on December 11 
about birthright citizenship--the guarantee contained in the 14th 
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution that all persons born in the United 
States and subject to the jurisdiction thereof are deemed citizens.
  I reviewed the legal history of this provision, the legal guarantee 
designed to erase the horrible legacy of slavery that had been embodied 
in the Dred Scott v. Sandford decision. It was a desire to correct that 
decision that led to the inclusion of this definition of citizenship in 
the 14th Amendment.
  I also rebutted, during that speech, too, common misconceptions: 
first, that children born in the United States to parents from other 
countries are not subject to the jurisdiction of the United States--
that has been ruled false by the Supreme Court since the late 1890s--
and, second, a claim often made by the President-elect that the United 
States is unique in the world in guaranteeing citizenship to all who 
are born within this country. Indeed, as I will discuss in a few 
minutes, the United States did, in fact, lead the way in guaranteeing 
birthright citizenship in the 1860s, but in doing so, it has led to a 
global movement that many other countries have decided to embrace.
  I believe the constitutional basis for birthright citizenship is 
clear, and those challenging the notion are mounting an argument with 
no legal

[[Page S51]]

basis. But, today, I want to move beyond the legal history and talk 
about the good that birthright citizenship brings to our Nation.
  Children born in America to immigrant parents from all corners of the 
world and from all social conditions have been an enormous benefit to 
our country and, indeed, to my Commonwealth of Virginia. More than 47 
million people living in the United States were born in another 
country, and another 16 million American children were born here to 
immigrant parents. Currently, more than 25 percent of all American 
children live in a household where at least one of their parents is an 
immigrant.

  How has immigration affected American society? Let's use one 
example--crime. The statistics are compelling and longstanding that 
immigration does not increase crime. Instead, the evidence is strong 
that crime has decreased as immigration has increased. In 1980, 
immigrants made up 6.2 percent of the American population--45 years 
ago. By 2022, the percentage had more than doubled, with immigrants now 
making up nearly 14 percent of the American population.
  What happened to crime during that period as the percentage of 
immigrants in the United States doubled? During this time, the crime 
rate in this country--as measured by crimes committed per 100,000 
people--had fallen by 60 percent. So, again, as the portion of our 
population that is immigrant has more than doubled, the crime rate in 
our country has fallen by more than 60 percent.
  A recent study conducted by scholars at Northwestern University 
pulled crime data from the United States going back 150 years, and 
during that 150-year period, they were able to reach a uniform 
conclusion that immigrants during this 150-year period have always been 
incarcerated at lower rates than native-born Americans.
  Another recent study commissioned by the National Institute of 
Justice, within the DOJ, looked at all crimes committed in Texas from 
2012 to 2018 and found that undocumented immigrants--the earlier 
statistics I have been giving are about immigrants generally, but this 
study in Texas found that undocumented immigrants are arrested at less 
than half of the rate of native-born U.S. citizens for violent crimes 
and drug crimes and at less than a quarter of the rate of native-born 
citizens for property crimes.
  Immigration is a plus for the American economy. Immigrant households 
generated more than $236 billion in income in 2022 and paid nearly $66 
billion in local, State, and Federal taxes. The Congressional Budget 
Office estimates that immigration flows to the United States that are 
projected would likely increase the American gross domestic product by 
nearly $9 trillion between now and 2034.
  And I know, because of the background of the President, this next 
statistic will not surprise you: More than 45 percent of Fortune 500 
companies in America were started by immigrants or by the children of 
immigrants. This is not just a relic of the past; it sticks to today. 
In 2023, 17 percent of new businesses that were started in America 
during that year were started by immigrants, and another 17 percent 
were started by the children of immigrants. Fully, 34 percent of new 
businesses in 2023 were started by immigrants or by the children of 
immigrants.
  So it is clear to me--the great-grandson of seven Irish immigrants 
and a Scottish immigrant whose dad was Scottish and mother was Irish--
that, throughout our history, immigrants have tremendously benefited 
this Nation, and that is not something that is suddenly turning from a 
positive to a negative.
  In Virginia, for example, when I was born, in 1958, about 1 out of 
100 Virginians had been born in another country. Today, it is more like 
1 out of 8, and that has coincided during my lifetime with Virginia 
moving from bottom quarter per capita income among American States to 
top quarter, and that movement has been significantly advanced by 
talented people from around the world deciding that they wanted to make 
Virginia their home.
  Enough of the statistics. How about some stories? Children of 
immigrants have made powerful contributions to the very essence of 
America.
  Where would American fashion be without people like Ralph Lauren, who 
just got a Presidential medal--born Ralph Lifshitz, in the Bronx, to 
parents who had emigrated from Poland?
  Where would American politics be without people like Kamala Harris, 
born in California to parents who had emigrated from Jamaica and India; 
or Marco Rubio, born in Florida to parents who had emigrated from Cuba; 
or Nikki Haley, born in South Carolina to parents who had emigrated 
from the Punjab region of India; or General and former Secretary of 
State Colin Powell, born in New York to parents who had emigrated from 
Jamaica?
  Where would American sports be without people like figure skater 
Michelle Kwan, born in California to parents who had emigrated from 
Hong Kong; or baseball legend Alex Rodriguez, born in Manhattan to 
parents who had emigrated from the Dominican Republic?
  Where would American acting be without people like Renee Zellweger, 
born in Texas to parents who had emigrated from Switzerland and Norway; 
or Bruce Lee, born in California to parents who had emigrated from Hong 
Kong and Shanghai?
  Where would American business be without people like ketchup magnate 
Henry Heinz, born in Pittsburgh to parents who had emigrated from 
Germany; or outdoor gear entrepreneur Eddie Bauer, born in Washington 
State to parents who had emigrated from Russia; or cosmetics titan 
Estee Lauder, born in Queens to parents who had emigrated from Hungary 
and Slovakia; or entertainment executive David Geffen, born in Brooklyn 
to parents who had emigrated from Mandatory Palestine?
  Where would American music be without people like Frank Sinatra, born 
in New York to Italian immigrants; or George Gershwin, the child of 
Russian immigrants?
  All of these Americans were born here to immigrant parents, some of 
whose immigration status was unclear at the time of their births and 
some of whose parents were clearly undocumented. And that is the point 
of birthright citizenship. When America is at its best, the status of 
our parents doesn't limit our ability to contribute to our community, 
and that is part of the genius of our Nation.
  I believe birthright citizenship--put into our Constitution in the 
1860s to rectify the sin of slavery and the egregious Dred Scott 
decision--has really been a blessing to our country, and it has 
actually inspired a global movement, especially among nations in the 
Americas, to guarantee citizenship to all born within their borders.
  There are slightly more than three dozen nations in the world that 
guarantee birthright citizenship, predominantly in the Americas. And 
why did it catch hold in the Americas? We called ourselves the New 
World. That was a phrase we often kind of used for the United States 
and the Americas to contrast it with an old world--mostly nations in 
Europe--that tended to lock you in a social status based on who your 
parents were. That was a reality that was pretty common when the 
English arrived in Jamestown in 1607 or at Plymouth Rock in 1619.
  As Europeans and others were coming to the United States before we 
declared our independence in 1776, it was fairly common for people to 
be locked into the status to which they were born, and that is why so 
many of our ancestors wanted to come to the United States--because they 
would not be locked into a social status based upon their parents' 
social status or have to look into a future where their own kids and 
grandkids and great-grandkids would be locked into a status. So the 
United States, in the 14th Amendment, decided to embrace a definitively 
new-world concept that, if you are born in this country, you are a U.S. 
citizen. It doesn't matter who your parents are, and you have the same 
opportunities and responsibilities as anyone born in this country. It 
is part of the genius of this country.

  I could tell thousands of stories like the ones that I have shared. I 
plan to speak more on this topic in the months to come because I am 
going to vigorously defend the constitutional principle of American 
birthright citizenship against any who would try to dilute it or tear 
it down.
  With that, I yield the floor.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Tennessee.

[[Page S52]]

  



                      Legislative Accomplishments

  Mrs. BLACKBURN. Mr. President, last week I joined one-third of this 
Chamber in taking the oath of office so that we could start a new term 
of Congress and celebrate what it means to be able to say: This is our 
new start. We have got 2 years. Let's see what we are going to do with 
this Congress.
  While taking that oath to support and to defend the Constitution and 
to defend our freedoms, I really felt and thought about what an honor 
it is to represent the people of the great State of Tennessee.
  Over the last 6 years, I have fought vigorously to bring the voice of 
the people of Tennessee to this Chamber to make certain that their 
thoughts and their wishes and their values were brought forward and 
that we made the effort to defend faith, family, freedom, hope, and 
opportunity, not only for Tennesseans but for all Americans.
  I will tell you, we were able to get so much done over the last 6 
years. Much of it was done by working with colleagues across the aisle, 
by taking these great ideas from Tennessee, bringing them here, and 
saying: How do we distill this so that it becomes a policy that is 
going to positively impact and make better the lives of Tennesseans and 
all Americans?
  In Tennessee, we have a lot of veterans, and there are two provisions 
that I was able to shepherd through and get signed into law. One is the 
VA Veteran Caregivers Act. And, of course, as our veterans have 
returned from wars, as caregivers from their families have stepped up 
to assist them, there were some--basically, some gaps that needed to be 
filled in. We did that.
  We also passed legislation, Strengthening VA Cybersecurity Act. I was 
so pleased that that got signed into law to make certain that the 
identities and the healthcare information, the benefit information of 
our veterans, is going to be protected. In Tennessee, we have a big 
military presence. Fort Campbell primarily sits in Tennessee. We have 
the Naval station over in Millington, right outside of Memphis. We have 
Oak Ridge National Lab. The Air Force has the Arnold Engineering 
Development in Tullahoma.
  And I was successful in pushing forward to end President Biden's 
COVID mandate--COVID vaccine mandate--on our military communities.
  In addition to achieving that, every year, Mr. President, you and I 
have worked tirelessly together to make certain that our military 
assets--our National Guard, our Active Duty--were well covered in the 
NDAA.
  There has also been a foreign policy issue, a couple of them, that I 
have paid attention to. One is strengthening our ties with Israel and 
standing with our allies like Taiwan and assisting them as we stand up 
to what I call the ``axis of evil''--Russia, China, Iran, and North 
Korea.
  One of the bipartisan measures that I brought forward after China 
took control of Hong Kong was to make certain that we supported 
internet freedom and that we blocked the export of crowd-control 
equipment to China and China-controlled Hong Kong and barred the FAA 
from buying drones from the U.S. adversaries. These provisions became 
law, and they strengthened our national security.
  We also fought to end the modern-day slavery of human trafficking, 
especially with my bipartisan REPORT Act and the Project Safe Childhood 
Act. Both of those were signed into law last year; and standing up for 
women with the Speak Out Act--Senator Gillibrand and I worked 
diligently on that--and the Women's Suffrage Centennial Commemorative 
Coin Act. And also, Senator Baldwin and I just got across the finish 
line the Women's Suffrage National Monument Location Act. I will tell 
you, so many people were absolutely shocked to find out that there has 
never been a monument in this city that recognized women's suffrage.
  We have also worked to confirm judges to the Federal bench, including 
Justice Amy Coney Barrett. Of course, we all know that that led to the 
overturning of the Roe decision and the Chevron decision--two decisions 
that will impact our Nation.
  We worked with the first Trump administration to protect life and to 
bar Federal funds from going to Planned Parenthood.
  And, Mr. President, you and I have put endless hours into making 
certain that we secured relief for communities in Tennessee and across 
the southeast that have been adversely impacted by Hurricane Helene. 
There is so much more that we have done.
  But we have turned the page now, and we are looking at how do we use 
these 2 years, this 119th Congress that is in front of us.
  We know that the American people have spoken. At the very top of 
their list is securing that southern border--getting that border under 
control, ending illegal entry into this country. The American people 
know, you cannot have--you will never have--national security without a 
secure border.
  Every law enforcement officer I talk with in Tennessee says we can't 
get our arms around gangs, drug trafficking, sex trafficking, and crime 
in our communities until that southern border is secured. So 
legislation that I am working diligently on to get passed is my CLEAR 
Act, which many of our colleagues in this Chamber have heard me talk 
about for years. Basically, this codifies the 287(g) Program. It would 
ensure that our State and local law enforcement officials can apprehend 
and detain criminal illegal aliens and make certain that ICE deports 
them and that ICE reimburses that local law enforcement agency.
  With all the harm that has been caused by sanctuary cities, this 
legislation would end Federal funds going into those entities. It 
should be a top priority of this Congress.
  We also need to lower costs and make life more affordable. We all 
know about the economy, taxes, inflation, affordability--another of the 
top issues for the American people. And they want us to hold this 
government accountable for what they have done to push inflation 
forward.
  It means that we need to make permanent the 2017 Trump tax cuts. That 
created the strongest economy in decades, and it truly spurred new 
investment in Tennessee and across the country.
  It also means slashing this out-of-control spending and making 
certain that we rein in this lawless bureaucracy that makes life worse 
for so many Tennesseans and Americans.
  President Trump is tackling this problem. He is doing it with the 
Department of Government Efficiency, or DOGE, which will be led by Elon 
Musk and Vivek Ramaswamy.
  With my DOGE Acts, Congress can play a crucial role in ensuring their 
reforms last beyond the Trump administration.
  You know, the American people want us to change how the Federal 
Government does business, get the spending under control, and get rid 
of the bloat that is in the Federal Government.
  I think we should concentrate on this to the point that we ``DOGE'' 
every single Federal Agency and turn ``DOGE'' into a verb, a term of 
action.
  Another goal at the top of the agenda--and this is a goal that 
Senator Blumenthal and I share. We have now worked 4 years on holding 
Big Tech accountable with the Kids Online Safety Act and ensuring that 
parents have the tools they need to protect their children in the 
virtual space.
  This is just a sample of all the work that is in front of us. But the 
list of things we can do to empower American workers and taxpayers and 
businesses and families and farmers goes on and on.
  I am looking forward to a new administration as we aggressively 
tackle these issues: expanding access to quality healthcare, especially 
for our vets and especially in rural America; defending female athletes 
in women sports from the radical left's agenda and celebrating the 
accomplishment of female athletes. We should pass my American Girls in 
Sports Day on October 10 of each and every year and celebrate our 
female athletes; we should end the surge of violent crime in cities 
across this country; and when it comes to supporting Tennessee's 
creative community with the American Music Tourism Act, the No FAKES 
Act, which is AI protections, and the HITS Act for our recording 
artists. Each and every one of these have a place on our agenda for the 
119th Congress.
  Before we can do any of this, we need to make certain that we confirm 
each of President Trump's nominees, make certain that he has his team 
in place, and that his Cabinet is in place so that they can carry out 
the mandate that

[[Page S53]]

was sent by the American people, which is: No more business as usual; 
secure the border; make certain that we get the cost of living down, we 
get inflation down; expand and extend those tax cuts; and be certain 
that, once again, our allies know they are an ally and our enemies fear 
us on the global stage.
  I suggest the absence of a quorum.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will call the roll.
  The senior assistant legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
  Mr. LANKFORD. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order 
for the quorum call be rescinded.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Schmitt). Without objection, it is so 
ordered.
  The Senator from Oklahoma.


                  Department of Government Efficiency

  Mr. LANKFORD. Mr. President, I don't even know how many times I have 
come to the floor of this Senate to be able to talk about government 
efficiency. It is not a shock for me to be able to come back here again 
today and to say: Let's talk about this. I don't know a single one of 
the great 4 million Oklahomans that if I went to their house today, 
knocked on their door, and said: Is the Federal Government the most 
efficient body in the country, that they would say yes.
  This should not be a partisan issue that government should be more 
efficient. Every single dollar that is spent was taken from an American 
in tax dollars or was borrowed so that their children would have to pay 
for it. This should be a straightforward issue.
  Every single year I put out a ``Federal Fumble Report,'' and I will 
put one out in a month or so. And when we release that report, everyone 
nods their heads and says: Yes, those are areas of inefficiency. And 
year after year, I highlight things like Federal tax dollars that were 
spent paying for a drag show in Ecuador.
  If the nice folks in Ecuador want to have drag shows, why are my 
folks in Oklahoma being forced to pay for them?
  I highlighted things like we did a research study in Ghana to be able 
to determine whether helmets made people on bikes in Ghana safer. By 
the way, I could go ahead and tell you that today without spending any 
Federal tax dollars. Yes, they will make it safer, but why were the 
folks in Oklahoma being forced pay for the study in Ghana to be able to 
study head injuries on folks on bikes and whether they should wear a 
helmet.
  The folks in Oklahoma paid for a study that came out as a book that 
was analyzing humans and chimpanzees in Sierra Leone and the effects of 
climate change on them. Again, I am sure there are nice folks in Sierra 
Leone that are very interested in that. Why are my folks in Oklahoma 
being forced to pay for that?
  I could go one after another after another on things that we have 
studied over the years, but let me tell you what happens. When we 
highlight these things and a little sunshine hits them, suddenly people 
start backing up, and Agencies stop funding some of these things that 
everyone nodded their head and said: Where did that crazy thing come 
from?
  So because of the reports that we put out, we are not paying for 
helmet studies in Ghana anymore. We are not paying for drag shows in 
Ecuador anymore. We are no longer paying for the study on the Russian 
wine industry that Americans used to pay for. We are no longer funding 
the 3D puppets that we once paid for. We have been able to put sunshine 
on those things, and those things have stopped.
  The challenge is, how do we actually set this into a process so that 
we are not having to play Whac-A-Mole all the time to be able to take 
down one after another after another.
  The people of my State, they don't want to pay for those things. They 
want to pay for border security and they want to pay for good schools 
and they want to have good roads. They want to have lower gas prices. 
Those are the things that they want.
  So how do we actually get to that? Well, I could outline right now 
$170 billion in wasteful spending in the Federal Government just today, 
simple things that most Americans would agree on. We spend $8 billion a 
year just for Federal buildings to lease them or to do maintenance for 
them--$8 billion a year. Currently, most of those buildings, because we 
have so many Federal employees that are teleworking, most of those 
buildings are 25 percent full. We are spending $8 billion a year on 
buildings that are mostly empty. Most businesses in America would say 
that is a waste of money. I am going to find a way to do that less, 
except the Federal Government doesn't do that. We just continue to be 
able to lease empty office space and maintain empty office space.

  That should not be a partisan issue. That should be an issue 
everybody in this body looks at and says: There is something that we 
could do to be able to make this better. Let's be more efficient.
  Starting with the new Trump administration, they have launched a new 
initiative that folks have made fun of, DOGE, the Department of 
Government Efficiency. And I am fascinated by the number of people that 
step out and they make fun of this initiative, to say: This Department 
of Government Efficiency--and then I ask them the simple question: Do 
you know a way the government could be more efficient? And people will 
say: Well, yeah, should we do that? Yes is the answer.
  So the very simple statement is: If we find duplication in 
government, why don't we highlight it and then eliminate it? If we find 
areas where there are tax regulations that actually don't make sense 
that actually slow the economy down rather than actually encourage 
economic development in the country, why don't we fix that? If we find 
areas of permitting, where permitting actually prevents government 
growth rather than accelerates the growth of our economy, why don't we 
go after that?
  Where there is waste in Agencies, where there are empty Federal 
buildings, where there are Federal projects that really should be done 
by the State or local government, why don't we make those changes?
  That is what this whole concept is about--the Department of 
Government Efficiency--is to actually create a mechanism to say: Let's 
stop talking about it and highlighting it a little bit at a time. Let's 
actually work to be able to make this better in the days ahead.
  I am very pleased that a whole group of colleagues are passionate 
about this as well. They are coming to the floor today to be able to 
highlight some of these areas of inefficiency and to say: Yes, 
absolutely. I see it as well.
  Because while I do ``Federal Fumbles'' every single year, I continue 
to also say to all of my colleagues: We should not be the only office 
doing this, and thankfully we are not. There are multiple offices that 
their staff are also looking for areas of government efficiency. And 
for the first time in a long time, we have built enough momentum to 
say: Let's get these done. Let's not just show them so we embarrass 
Agencies not to do it next year; let's actually set a process in place.
  So today I have invited multiple colleagues, including my colleague 
sitting at the dais today, to be able to find a moment in their very 
busy schedules to be able to come and highlight areas where the 
government can be more efficient, where we can be more effective at 
protecting taxpayer dollars, and where we can stop throwing American's 
dollars out the door for things that everyone would recognize as 
wasteful.
  When we have almost $2 trillion in debt, it is definitely the moment 
for us to say: Let's work on being even more efficient in the days 
ahead because we desperately need that.
  So, with that, I yield the floor to my colleague from West Virginia 
who has been very outspoken in trying to be able to protect taxpayer 
dollars in West Virginia and for the Nation and to try to make ways to 
make this more effective in the days ahead.
  I yield the floor.
  Mrs. CAPITO. I want to thank the Senator from Oklahoma for his 
leadership on this. We are just getting started here. So I am very 
excited, as I know all of us are, to embark on a serious mission of not 
just government waste but pulling in our government spending to make it 
make sense and more toward a balanced budget.


                          California Wildfires

  Mr. President, before I begin, I would like to say a few words about 
the tragedy unfolding on the west coast. I

[[Page S54]]

know many of us have been looking at the television and watching the 
structure fires and heard from friends who have children there or are 
themselves there, and I think it is just unimaginable. So I just want 
to let them know in California that we are praying for them and their 
families, for their safety, and that hopefully this will all come under 
control sooner than later.
  But I have seen this on the TV, and I would say it from this podium, 
that I urge all residents, if you are told to evacuate, don't waste any 
time. It sounds like quick and fast evacuations are smart and are being 
advised. So please be super careful as we move through this tragedy.
  You know, Americans are resilient people, but the Californians and 
the Los Angelenos are being asked for a lot right now, so it is really 
tough.


                  Department of Government Efficiency

  Mr. President, so today I am going to speak about an issue that 
weighs heavily on the American worker and taxpayer, and this is the 
waste, fraud, and abuse rampant in our Federal Government. When I say 
``heavy,'' I mean really heavy, really heavy, because billions of hard-
earned taxpayer dollars are at stake here.
  Under President Biden, wasteful government spending has just spiraled 
out of control, harming our hard-working Americans and their 
livelihood. Each misspent dollar represents a missed opportunity for 
our neighbors, our communities, our families.
  But that is going to end with this incoming administration and, I 
think, the control of the House and the Senate. In the 119th Congress, 
Federal spending comes with a promissory note of accountability to the 
American people. No more spendthrift bureaucrats getting out of line. 
No more blank checks or wild excesses. The American people have had 
enough and rightfully so. They are ready for the government to work for 
them.
  Republicans are proud to have the Department of Government 
Efficiency, better known as DOGE. I remember I probably heard DOGE, 
what, about a month ago? I am wondering, What is this? I know that Elon 
and Vivek are both very busy men. So I want to thank them especially 
for conceiving this idea and dedicating their time and energy and 
gathering other folks' help to eliminating government waste.
  Like a one-two punch, Congress and the DOGE Commission will identify 
and address the most flagrant abuses of the Federal bureaucracy. DOGE 
will provide the ideas from these two men, and Congress will bring the 
constitutional oversight and legislative authority.
  We plan to hit the ground running, really, on day one of the Trump 
administration, to take aim at the worst excesses left over.
  When it comes to wasteful government spending in the jurisdiction of 
my committee, which is the Environment and Public Works Committee--I am 
very thrilled, as of yesterday's meeting, to become the new chairman 
there--look no further than the groundwork we laid last year through 
the investigations of my committee. We worked on looking at the 
spending in the massive, bloated, ill-conceived Inflation Reduction 
Act. The so-called IRA, which was a bill passed with only Democrat 
votes, authorized billions of dollars in new handouts from EPA to the 
Democrat-aligned groups.
  Recently, an EPA employee actually admitted that its current grant-
making process--that means between now and January 20, when President 
Trump takes over--he equated it to being akin to ``throwing gold bars 
off the Titanic.'' That should send chills to every American taxpayer--
``throwing gold bars off the Titanic.'' We have reached unprecedented 
levels of waste, fraud, and abuse.
  The American people rejected this kind of reckless governance in 
November through their voice at the ballot box. Bureaucrats are 
desperately--right now, as we speak--writing checks because come 
January 20, they know President Trump will take the checkbook away and 
ask for accountability.
  My committee already issued a clear warning to the EPA in a letter in 
December. We demanded to know who is getting these gold bars that are 
being thrown off the Titanic and in what amounts. Most importantly, we 
want a clear paper trail so the bureaucrats at the EPA can't bury 
wasteful spending on the way out the door.
  The committee has already uncovered handouts to groups that are anti-
American, anti-Semitic, anti-Israel, anti-police, and anti-border 
security. That is it--not a dollar more. For example, of the $3 billion 
of the IRA dedicated to the new environmental and climate justice block 
grant program through the IRA, the EPA announced over the last several 
months that it would give $50 million to Climate Justice Alliance, $50 
million to the New York Immigration Coalition, and $100 million to the 
NDN Collective. The Climate Justice Alliance promotes wildly anti-
Semitic rhetoric. The New York Immigration Coalition advocates for 
radical open border policies. Most egregiously--remember, this is the 
one getting $100 million--the NDN Collective goes as far as to call 
America an evil country.
  Let me be clear. These groups should not and will not receive one 
dime of taxpayer dollars. The American people should be outraged, as I 
am--I think you can tell my voice is getting a little bit louder here--
at the abuse of their tax dollars. These funds were meant to benefit 
them, not to prop up radical political groups or line the pockets of 
bureaucrats with questionable priorities. Taxpayer dollars should never 
go to organizations that hate America or our values. It is pretty 
simple when you put it like that.
  To those who say that there is no alternative, that government is and 
always will be wasteful, I say look to the State of West Virginia. My 
home State consistently generates large budget surpluses, demonstrating 
that we can protect our values and our interests without recklessly 
spending the taxpayers' hard-earned dollars.
  I think it is time to bring some good old West Virginia thrift to the 
bureaucracy in Washington, DC. Many of our States are operating under 
the same parameters. With the President, the House, the Senate, and the 
DOGE Commission all on the same page, working together, we are poised 
to do just that. If we are to spend taxpayers' dollars, I do not 
believe there is an article I role for unlimited government spending; 
it must be in the furtherance of the benefit of our Nation. The 
American taxpayers deserve a government that respects their hard-earned 
dollars.
  The relationship between the government and its citizens has been 
frayed by years of neglect, waste, and distrust. Mending this 
relationship will not happen overnight. It is a long process. It is a 
process Republicans are prepared to take, to embrace, and undertake. We 
will end the reckless spending spree, we will put an end to 
bureaucratic waste, and we will aim to ensure that every dollar that 
leaves the Federal Treasury is used in service to the American people. 
This is our commitment to rebuild trust, to prioritize the needs of the 
people, and to ensure that the government serves them, not the other 
way around.
  Thank you, my fellow Senator. I appreciate it, and I look forward to 
working with all of us here on this very important issue.
  Mr. LANKFORD. I am especially grateful for all the work you have 
done.
  Mr. President, I would like to introduce a fellow colleague, Senator 
Joni Ernst from Iowa. She is the founder of the DOGE Caucus and has 
been the one who has been very passionate about trying to find the 
waste in government. I ask that she be recognized to speak.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Iowa.
  Ms. ERNST. Mr. President, thank you to my colleague from Oklahoma, 
Senator James Lankford, for arranging today's event.
  Mr. President, a winter storm shut down the Nation's Capital this 
week, but did anyone notice? Essential government employees showed up 
to do their jobs while the others enjoyed days off.
  My telework report revealed that just 6 percent of workers report in-
person full time, and these bureaucrats are doing anything but working. 
This is sadly just more business as usual. However, it is a fitting 
prelude to a much bigger storm that is headed this way that will sweep 
over this city and forever alter the way it operates. I am, of course, 
talking about the Department of Government Efficiency, or DOGE.

[[Page S55]]

  Headed up by Elon Musk and Vivek Ramaswamy, DOGE is putting 
Washington on notice. Henceforward, every cent being spent will now be 
scrutinized. All regulations must be justified and continually 
rejustified using data and outcomes, not just ideology. And the 
government works for the people, not the other way around.
  To support these efforts, I am honored to be chairing the Senate DOGE 
Caucus and working to downsize the government, which is why my 
colleagues and I stand here today. For that, I again want to thank 
Senator Lankford, a founding member of the caucus, author of his 
``Federal Fumbles,'' and a true hero to taxpayers, for organizing 
today's discussion.
  It is a rare occasion for this many Senators to assemble on the 
Senate floor to call for spending cuts. In fact, since my fellow Iowans 
sent me to the Senate 10 years ago to make the porkers squeal, it has 
been a very, very lonely fight.
  In this era of political polarization, Democrats and Republicans 
still come together in agreement over one issue: living high off the 
hog. When faced with proposals to trim the fat from Washington's 
budget, Members of Congress from both parties act like Goldilocks--it 
is always too little or too big and never just right. But the real 
``make-believe'' of this fairytale is that it is impossible to cut 
spending without causing pain.
  Most Americans aren't even benefiting in any meaningful way from the 
hundreds of billions of dollars hidden in our Federal budget. In fact, 
Washington's out-of-control spending has been fanning the flames of 
inflation over the past 4 years, increasing everyday costs for families 
all across the country.
  There is no time to wait for DOGE to get to work because even being a 
lameduck isn't slowing down Biden's reckless spending. Biden's binge-
buying bureaucrats are being ordered to work overtime, including 
weekends, to get billions of dollars out the door as quickly as 
possible before President-elect Trump takes office.
  At the same time, the outgoing administration is cutting collective 
bargaining deals with government employee unions, giving bureaucrats 
the right to stay home from work until--get this--2029--conveniently 
after President Trump's term. If Federal employees don't want to come 
back to work, well, you know what, DOGE and I are happy to make that 
dream come true.
  My New Year's resolution is to put Washington back to work and on a 
diet. This week, I am reintroducing my bills to drain the swamp by 
relocating Federal Agencies and bureaucrats outside Washington. I am 
also putting forward a plan with $2 trillion in potential savings.
  Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that this letter be printed in 
the Record.

                                         United States Senate,

                                Washington, DC, November 25, 2024.
     Mr. Elon Musk and Mr. Vivek Ramaswamy
     Co-Chairmen, Department of Government Efficiency.
       Dear Mr. Musk and Mr. Ramaswamy: Thank you for stepping up 
     to take on the challenge of saving taxpayers from 
     Washington's out-of-control spending that put our nation $36 
     trillion in debt. Your mission could not be more urgent, and 
     there's no team better suited to lead the effort.
       My fellow Iowans sent me to the Senate ten years ago to 
     make the porkers squeal. It's been a very lonely fight. In 
     this era of political polarization, Democrats and Republicans 
     always come together in agreement over one issue: living high 
     off the hog.
       When faced with proposals to trim the fat from Washington's 
     budget, members of Congress from both parties act like 
     Goldilocks. It's too little or too big, always too hard, and 
     never just right. But the real ``make-believe'' of this fairy 
     tale is that it's impossible to reduce Washington's budget 
     without causing pain. Most Americans aren't even benefitting 
     in any meaningful way from hundreds of billions of dollars 
     being wasted.
       While you're seeking ``super high-IQ small-government 
     revolutionaries'' for ``unglamorous cost-cutting,'' all 
     that's really needed is a little common sense. If you can't 
     find waste in Washington, there can only be one reason: you 
     didn't look.
       With $3 billion of interest being added to our national 
     debt every day, the longer we delay tackling the problem, the 
     further away the finish line gets.
       To give you a head start, here are a trillion dollars' 
     worth of ideas for trimming the fat and reducing red ink:


                            Vacant Buildings

       Maintaining and leasing government office buildings costs 
     $8 billion every year. Another $7.7 billion is spent for the 
     energy to keep them running. Yet, with the federal workforce 
     still largely working from home, not a single headquarters of 
     a major government agency or department in the nation's 
     capital is even half full. Billions more are being spent 
     buying brand new furnishings for the abandoned offices. The 
     government also owns 7,697 vacant buildings and another 2,265 
     that are partially empty. An additional $14 million is being 
     spent leasing underutilized space and nearly $1 million more 
     for its maintenance. Consolidating office space reduces costs 
     and auctioning off unneeded properties brings in revenues.


                             Audit the IRS

       Americans are paying the salaries and benefits for 
     thousands of federal employees who aren't paying their own 
     taxes. I audited the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and found 
     more than 5,800 employees and contractors of the tax 
     collection agency owe almost $50 million. As a result, many 
     are now in payment plans, but 860 still haven't paid their 
     overdue taxes. Tax evasion isn't just a problem at the IRS 
     either. Government-wide, there are nearly 150,000 tax cheats 
     owing $1.5 billion in unpaid taxes.


                   Biden's Billion Dollar Boondoggles

       President Biden's so-called infrastructure program provided 
     $7.5 billion to build a nationwide network of electric 
     vehicle (EV) charging stations and $42 billion to expand 
     broadband. Three years later, just 17 EV stations are 
     completed and not a single person--not one--has been 
     connected to the internet yet. It's time to pull the plug.
       The Biden administration also paid hundreds of billions of 
     COVID relief dollars to fraudsters. A U.S. attorney calls it 
     ``the biggest fraud in a generation.'' Some swindlers who 
     uploaded pictures of Barbie dolls as photo identification on 
     the applications were even approved to receive money. But the 
     Biden administration is being lax recollecting the cash and 
     time is running out. The Special Inspector General for 
     Pandemic Recovery investigating the grift expires in March, 
     unless Congress extends its mission until every penny is 
     returned.


         Golden State Gravy Trains Taking Taxpayers for a Ride

       Just three California gravy trains are on track to burn 
     through billions of dollars:
       The California High-Speed Train is costing about $ 1.8 
     million a day to build and won't be completed for another 
     decade. The current cost estimate to complete the project is 
     $128 billion--nearly $100 billion more than the original 
     price tag! President Trump previously canceled federal 
     funding for the project, but President Biden restored the 
     money.
       The price tag of Nancy Pelosi's six-mile subway extension 
     from San Francisco to Silicon Valley is $9.3 billion, more 
     than $1.5 billion per mile.
       The 1.3-mile extension of San Francisco's Caltrain rail 
     service is one of the costliest transit projects in the world 
     with a price tag of $6.7 billion, or $5.15 billion per mile.
       Going a billion dollars over budget isn't a rounding error, 
     it's a train wreck.


                         Christmas in September

       In Washington, Christmas comes in September when binge 
     buying bureaucrats go hog wild fulfilling their own wish 
     lists. That's because the federal government's authority to 
     spend money left over at the end of a fiscal year expires at 
     midnight on September 30. In the rush to use it before they 
     lose it, $53 billion was recently spent in a single week! The 
     September spending sprees of the past included impulse 
     purchases on $4.6 million of lobster tail and crab and $2.1 
     million for games and toys, including nearly $12,000 for a 
     foosball table. For the sake of taxpayers, DOGE needs to be 
     the Grinch.


                        Welfare for Politicians

       The Presidential Election Campaign Fund provides welfare 
     checks for politicians with presidential aspirations. It 
     hasn't supported a winning candidate in two decades. This 
     year the program paid out more than $1 million to Mike 
     Pence's campaign and $380,000 to Green Party candidate Jill 
     Stein. More than $16.6 million is currently available for 
     funding the future aspirations of fringe candidates destined 
     for failure.


                              Bad Pennies

       The government is losing money making money, paying more 
     than three cents to produce a penny and more than 11 cents 
     for a nickel. That makes no cents when simply changing the 
     composition of the coins could save more than $50 million a 
     year.


                   Trillion Dollar Secret Slush Funds

       This past year, Biden's bureaucrats claimed the Department 
     of Veterans Affairs and the Small Business Administration ran 
     out of money needed to assist veterans and pay for emergency 
     disaster recovery efforts. Yet, Washington always finds money 
     when it comes to paying for pet projects, and some accounts 
     are flush with cash. There's still billions of dollars of 
     unspent COVID relief dollars, for example. Most of us feel 
     lucky when we find a $20 bill in our pocket or some change in 
     the couch. Well, Washington ended the last fiscal year with 
     trillions of dollars left unspent, $1.6 trillion of which 
     isn't even obligated for any specific purpose yet. With 
     trillions of dollars stashed away in secret slush funds, why 
     is Washington borrowing any more money?


                             Bogus Bonuses

       Federal employees and government contractors are being 
     rewarded with financial

[[Page S56]]

     bonuses for poor performance resulting in delays and cost 
     overruns.
       The Pentagon is paying millions of dollars in unearned 
     bonuses, including $10.6 million to a contractor that created 
     ``a life and safety concern'' for airmen by failing to 
     provide the necessary parts for jets.
       The VA misspent $10.8 million on bonuses for the 
     department's senior execs from the PACT Act, passed to care 
     for veterans exposed to toxic substances. As a result of the 
     VA's mismanagement, the program went bankrupt, forcing 
     Congress to pass an emergency bailout bill.
       NASA is paying out-of-this-world bonuses totaling more than 
     $500 million to the contractors of the next manned moon 
     mission, which is billions of dollars over budget and years 
     behind schedule as a result of poor performance. Houston, we 
     have a problem. Taxpayers were promised the moon but are 
     instead getting stuck with a ``moondoggle.''


                             silly science

       Remember when America could actually land a man on the 
     moon? Most Americans weren't even born when the last 
     astronaut stepped foot on the moon. Today, we're spending 
     billions on science and NASA can't even return our astronauts 
     trapped on the International Space Station to Earth. American 
     science is unmatched. We transformed the world with the 
     creation of the internet, and SpaceX is aiming beyond the 
     moon. The question is what are we learning from the billions 
     of taxpayer dollars Washington is spending on research and 
     development?
       The National Science Foundation is discovering the answers 
     to questions like:
       How fast can a shrimp run on a treadmill? (66 feet per 
     minute)
       Where does it hurt the most to be stung by a bee? (in the 
     nostril)
       What were viewers' facial reactions to the Trump/Clinton 
     presidential debate? (men looked angry and women appeared 
     sad, especially when Clinton spoke)
       Which tastes better, water from a bottle or out of the 
     toilet? (both were rated about the same)
       Does recycling make men seem less manly? (yes)
       How long does it take for a panda to poop? (about 12 
     seconds)
       What word are Republican members of Congress more likely to 
     tweet than Democrats? (freedom)
       Can elephants solve puzzles? (yes)
       Not to be outdone, the National Institutes of Health spent 
     tax dollars researching:
       To live a longer, healthier life, what political party 
     should you join? (Republican)
       Are pampered cats less likely to poop outside the 
     litterbox? (yes)
       Is pizza as addictive as drugs? (yes)
       Do pigeons gamble? (you bet)
       Does this sour cream and onion flavored potato chip look 
     like Elvis? (yes, but judge for yourself)
       These might be fun to ask contestants on a game show, but 
     the real question is: why are taxpayers supporting any of 
     these studies?


                     Unemployment for Millionaires

       Nearly 15,000 millionaires collect $213.3 million in 
     unemployment payments in a single year. An old regulation 
     left over from the Great Society-era requires the benefits be 
     made available when someone loses a job, even if the 
     recipient is still making a million dollars or more in other 
     income. Most of the hardworking Americans picking up the 
     costs aren't bringing home anywhere near that amount, even if 
     they're working two jobs. The million-dollar question is: why 
     is Washington forcing middle class Americans to finance the 
     lifestyles of jobless millionaires?


                            government swag

       Federal agencies collectively spend $1.5 billion every year 
     on public relations and propaganda. This includes koozies, 
     key chains, coloring books, snuggies, and costumed mascots. 
     Let's bag the swag.


                    every cloud has a silver lining

       Consolidating agencies' cloud computing software licenses 
     could save $750 million every year.


                         china's mad scientists

       The entire world knows Dr. Fauci funded risky research on 
     coronaviruses in China's Wuhan Institute of Virology with 
     taxpayer dollars. My investigations discovered millions more 
     sent to other institutions and labs in the communist country 
     for secretive risky research.


                      united nations overpayments

       The United Nations (U.N.) charges the U.S. higher 
     membership dues than any other country and then Washington 
     voluntarily contributes $15 billion in additional 
     contributions. U.N. staff helped plan and execute Hamas' 
     terrorist attack on Israel in which American citizens were 
     murdered and taken hostage. And a 2024 U.N. migrant plan 
     promotes cash handouts for migrants to cover travel expenses 
     and includes a map with a red line leading right to the U.S. 
     border. Our tax dollars to the U.N. are subsidizing threats 
     to our own national security!


                          defenceless spending

       It's time to declare war on waste at Department of Defense 
     (DoD). The Pentagon has never passed an audit and is unable 
     to fully account for its budget. By its own estimates, DoD 
     wastes $125 billion on bloated bureaucracy and inefficiency. 
     DoD could save $527 million just by streamlining the 
     duplication and unnecessary overlap within its storage and 
     distribution centers. DoD overpayments are legendary and the 
     department is still overpaying nearly $1 million for spare 
     parts. This includes a nearly 8,000 percent mark-up for a 
     soap dispenser than the shelf price and $1,220 for a coffee 
     cup.


   remove ineligible recipients of federal employees health benefits

       The Federal Employees Health Benefits program is spending 
     almost $1 billion a year paying the bills of individuals who 
     aren't even eligible for the coverage. Over 12 years, the 
     program covered more than $100,000 in claims for just two 
     ineligible enrollees.


                           paid to do nothing

       While millions of Americans are working two or more jobs to 
     make ends meet, some federal employees aren't working at all. 
     Dozens of Department of Energy employees with nothing to do 
     spend the workday napping or playing chess, dominoes, and 
     cards. Hundreds of other federal employees spend years with 
     no work assignments while on paid administrative leave, 
     costing more than $31 million in salary payments a year. 
     Congress passed a law to fix this problem years ago, but it's 
     still not enacted. Put them to work or send them home for 
     good!


                       stop giving away the farm

       Your call for budget cutting crusaders asks for individuals 
     willing to work 80+ hours a week. Those type of hours aren't 
     unusual for our nation's farmers and ranchers. No one works 
     harder and every single American depends on the fruits of 
     their labors. So nothing bugs me more than when the U.S. 
     Department of Agriculture (USDA) gives away farm aid to pay 
     for pet projects, like subsidizing cricket farms or teaching 
     pigs to play video games, that do nothing to support 
     agriculture.


                   snap back inaccurate snap payments

       Nearly $1 billion of ineligible Supplemental Nutrition 
     Assistance Program (SNAP) benefits are being paid every 
     month, according to USDA's own estimates. Tens of thousands 
     of recipients enrolled in the program do not even qualify for 
     the assistance and double dippers are getting second helpings 
     from multiple states. Fixing these bureaucratic blunders 
     would save more than $10 billion a year.


             reducing duplication and improving performance

       More than $200 billion in financial benefits could be 
     achieved by implementing the thousands of outstanding 
     recommendations made by Congress' nonpartisan watchdog 
     agency, the Government Accountability Office. We may not 
     agree with every suggestion, but GAO always puts taxpayers' 
     best interest first.


           require commonsense project management principles

       For every $1 billion Washington spends. $102 million is 
     wasted as projects go over budget, are delayed, or fail to 
     meet projected goals. Implementing the most basic management 
     systems--like establishing scopes and goals--could have saved 
     taxpayers $688.5 billion from the $6.75 trillion the federal 
     government spent this past year.
       This is by no means an exhaustive list, and I will be 
     providing many more recommendations soon. My team and I are 
     ready to help you make some prime cuts.
           Sincerely,
                                                    Joni K. Ernst,
                                            United States Senator.

  Ms. ERNST. Mr. President, my proposal includes selling off thousands 
of vacant and underutilized buildings; auditing the IRS to fire the 
thousands of employees who owe tens of millions of dollars in unpaid 
taxes; pulling the plug on Biden's billion-dollar boondoggles for gravy 
trains that never leave the station and electric vehicle stations that 
aren't charging up anything but debt; bagging the swag and propaganda 
promoting government programs and Agencies at a cost of $1.5 billion a 
year; and changing the composition of coins so we stop losing money 
making money. In fact, there is no better example of the cost of 
government inefficiency. Washington spends 3 cents to produce a penny 
and 11 cents to produce a nickel. That makes no sense. A penny here, a 
nickel there--eventually, these examples all add up to millions, 
billions, and eventually, trillions.
  The bottom line is that if you can't find waste in Washington, there 
can only be one reason: You didn't look.
  Well, folks, I spent the last decade looking while just about 
everyone else seems to have been looking the other way--until now. 
While this is a personal issue for me, it should not be a partisan 
issue. After all, every American benefits from a more efficient 
government, and everyone loses when tax dollars are wasted.
  I have worked across the aisle on a number of issues to make 
Washington more transparent and accountable, so I would invite anyone 
in this body and everyone who may be watching at home who has ideas to 
join this conversation and our movement because DOGE is inevitable.
  I yield the floor.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Mullin). The Senator from Nebraska.

[[Page S57]]

  

  Mr. RICKETTS. Mr. President, I rise today to compliment my esteemed 
colleague from Iowa, who is the founding member of the DOGE Caucus, as 
well as Elon Musk and Vivek Ramaswamy for their effort to be able to 
create the Department of Government Efficiency.
  This is something that is near and dear to my heart because as 
Governor of Nebraska, this is what we did. We focused on how we could 
drive efficiency through our State operations.
  Now, if you want to think about the big argument between Republicans 
and Democrats on a really macro scale--what it is--it comes down to 
what should government properly do. What should be the size and scope 
of government? Well, there are actually things we agree that government 
should do between Republicans and Democrats; and for those things, we 
should do them really, really well. All too often, government fails 
because it is not properly managed, because we don't do a good job; and 
when we don't do a good job, we end up wasting taxpayers' dollars.
  As the Governor of Nebraska, this is one of the things I focused on 
to be able to do a better job on--take my private sector experiences, 
in coming from the business world, and applying them to the running of 
State government. We showed that the things you do in the private 
sector will work in running the public sector as well.
  In the State of Nebraska, we implemented Lean Six Sigma. Lean Six 
Sigma is a process improvement methodology. There are a number of them 
out there, and this is the one we chose. What it does is you break down 
an operation; you count what the steps are and what the steps, you 
know, should be; you get the frontline people engaged--the people 
actually doing the work involved in looking at those steps; and see if 
you can cut the waste in the number of steps and everything else so 
that you can make the process more efficient. That is how you can do a 
better job of actually providing services while reducing costs at the 
same time.
  That is the thing. Every time you get to government, they say: Oh, we 
want to cut expenses, blah, blah, blah. Oh, you are going to cut 
services.
  No. No. No.
  In the private sector, you can't go to your customers and say: Well, 
I am going to reduce your prices, but I am going to also reduce your 
service, because your customers will go someplace else. It doesn't work 
that way. So the private sector figures out how to do a better job of 
providing services while reducing their expenses. We can do the same 
thing in government. In the private sector, you have competition that 
is going to drive inefficient businesses out. In the government sector, 
it is going to require people like Elon, Vivek, and the Senators here 
in this room to be able to drive that through our government Agencies 
to get that efficiency.
  I want to talk a little bit about what we did, because it was very 
effective. I mentioned that you measure the steps. You count how many 
steps there are, and see where the overlaps are. One area we did it was 
in air construction permits. We had 190 steps that it took to issue 
that permit. We cut that down to 22 steps. By doing that--sorry. It was 
110 steps that we cut down to 22. By doing that, we cut it down from 
190 days to be able to issue that permit to 65 days. Now, we can't 
change any of the environmental regulations. That was just a better job 
of issuing those permits. And, when you free up your teammates' time 
because they are not wasting time on all those extra steps, they can do 
more work--they are more productive--and can focus on things that are 
going to be more important--for example, more difficult permits.
  We used this in a variety of ways, and we showed lots of improvement. 
For example, in our economic assistance line in August of 2014, it was 
taking about 23 minutes to answer that phone call. We set a goal of 
setting 5 minutes or less to answer those phone calls for those people 
who were calling in seeking our assistance. We hit that goal all the 
way up until the pandemic.
  It was taking us 40 days to issue SNAP applications--food stamps. 
Again, if you are one of those families in need and it is taking 40 
days to process that application, what is that saying about how we 
think about it? We set a goal of getting applications done in 10 days. 
We hit that all the way up until we hit the pandemic. Then, even when 
we got out of compliance--when we started going above 10 days--we knew 
we were above it, and we took the steps to start getting that number 
back down again.
  We were able to do it in a variety of other ways; like, for example, 
with the Department of Motor Vehicles, getting you your driver's 
license. In our Centers of Excellence, we were able to get that from 22 
minutes down to 8 minutes in getting people in and out the door.
  With our Green Sheets, which is what we used in our Department of 
Transportation to be able to make sure that our contractors were doing 
the right things with regard to the environment or antiquities or 
whatever--making sure they were following all the rules--we were able 
to cut that from 16 days down to 3 days so that those contractors could 
get into the field faster and get our projects moving faster.
  Here is another one: We would issue reimbursement checks to families 
with children who have special needs. Often, these special needs 
children will have to have specialized care. Families will have to 
travel to that hospital to go get that. They would get reimbursed for 
those expenses, but it was taking us 13 to 15 days to reimburse those 
expenses. Well, what is wrong with that? That is over a 2-week pay 
period. Those families had to float those costs from one paycheck to 
the next paycheck. You know and I know that a lot of families live 
paycheck to paycheck, so that put a financial burden on those families 
with kids with special needs. We were able to cut that time down to 2 
days to be able to make sure we could get those expense checks back to 
those families in need so that they wouldn't have to float that and 
experience that financial hardship from one payment to the next.
  Well, what did we have to do to do that? We had to get everybody on 
board--our entire team. At the end of the day, in the State of 
Nebraska, we trained over 30,000 of our teammates in the Lean Six Sigma 
process. There were wipeouts kind of in the introductory one. Over 
6,200 of our mid-level managers in the yellow belts, the next level up. 
We trained 248 executive green belts. Those are the upper level 
executives--again, more training. Then we trained nine black belts. 
Those are the folks who oversee the whole program.
  By implementing all of that, we were able to save over 900,000 hours 
of our teammates' time. We did over 1,000 different projects. We saved 
$115 million in hard savings. Because of those processes, for example, 
we were able to reduce the square footage that we were occupying as the 
State of Nebraska by 60,000. It was 60,000 square feet we took off our 
rolls; we reduced our employment by 3\1/2\ percent; and we were able to 
control spending.
  Before I became Governor, our budget was growing at 6\1/2\ percent a 
year. I would say that was not sustainable. We were able to, on 
average, while I was Governor, keep that growth of our budget to 2.8 
percent a year--just 2.8 percent a year on average. I might just 
contrast that to what we are doing here in the Federal Government right 
now. In 2019, we spent $4.4 trillion. In 2024, that was closer to $6.8 
trillion, $6.9 trillion. That is, roughly, a 55-percent increase in 
just 5 years. Folks, that is not sustainable.
  That is why what this Department of Government Efficiency, the DOGE, 
and what this incoming administration are going to do is so important. 
We have got to be able to get our spending under control. It is a risk 
to our country. We have got to get this under control, and we can do 
it. We can do a better job of providing services and keeping our 
expenses down just like the private sector does by leveraging tools 
like Lean Six Sigma, just like the private sector does.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Kansas.
  Mr. MARSHALL. Mr. President, as you know, most every January, hard-
working families across this country gather together at their kitchen 
tables, and they work on a budget. Then, once a month, they try to 
balance their checkbooks, making a budget, balancing the checkbooks. 
Congress seems to be incapable of doing either of these. That is why, 
today, this country faces a national debt of over $36 trillion--$36

[[Page S58]]

trillion. I believe that debt is the greatest threat we have to our 
long-term national security and to the future of America in so many 
ways.

  First, we need to look at how we got here. How did we get to $36 
trillion in national debt? I think many of us feel it has been driven 
by Federal waste, by fraud, and gross mismanagement.
  Now, last year's Federal deficit--I want you to think about this. We 
are talking about the deficit now. We have a national debt of $36 
trillion. We have a deficit each year. So in this last fiscal year, the 
Federal Government took in $5 trillion, but we spent $7 trillion. Let 
me say it again. We took in $5 trillion, but we managed to spend $7 
trillion. That is pretty simple math for a deficit of some $2 trillion.
  This last year, we eclipsed a new benchmark. The Federal Government 
spent more on interest payments--on interest alone--on the debt than it 
did on funding the national defense or Medicare. Let me say it again. 
We spent more on making an interest payment than we did on national 
defense or Medicare. No matter what your priorities are--whether it is 
schools, roads, and bridges, or maybe you think we need more military--
when we are spending $1 trillion a year as a nation on interest, lots 
of things are going to go unaccomplished.
  The American people have clearly spoken as 77 million people elected 
Donald J. Trump to be the President and, with them, his priorities in 
that we deal with the bureaucratic inefficiencies, the overregulation, 
and a government that prioritizes beltway politics over the heartland, 
all without any transparency or accountability.
  So what am I talking about?
  The Pentagon can't account for $824 billion. Improper Federal 
payments in 2023 were $236 billion. The pandemic relief lost to fraud 
and abuse was $200 billion. Right there together, just those three 
items alone, add up to $1.2 trillion of waste, fraud, and 
mismanagement.
  We take a peek again at 2023 and the Biden-Harris administration's 
open border policies. Think about the costs of taking on these 10 
million--maybe more--illegal immigrants. It is at least $150 billion.
  Our Department of Education spent over $1 billion in promoting DEI 
initiatives in schools. Let me say it again--$1 billion in promoting 
the DEI initiatives in schools, but our kids can't read and write and 
do math.
  Meanwhile, the U.S. Government adds $6 billion of debt daily. So we 
are at $6 billion. By the time you wake up in the morning, go to bed, 
and wake up the next day, we have added another $6 billion of debt. The 
total debt now, as I said earlier, is over $36 trillion. Again, we are 
making an interest payment of $1 trillion each year.
  So this is where DOGE comes in. What can DOGE do here? I am proud to 
be one of the founding members. I appreciate Senator Ernst's leadership 
on this. I am committed to addressing this crisis and to reforming the 
Federal Government to operate with the efficiency and accountability 
that Americans deserve.
  To address this spending crisis, we need a plan, and we need 
accountability. We have some simple reforms that we can make on day one 
that slash the spending and disrupt the unaccounted-for blank check 
spending that we are seeing out of this Federal Government. So here are 
just a few examples, and I have been sharing these with people who are 
coming into this new administration.
  If this were a business, the first thing I would do when I would have 
seen that we had spent $2 trillion more than we had taken in--the first 
thing I would do is I would freeze Federal employees. I would not hire 
any more Federal employees.
  Next, I would require all Federal employees to return to their 
offices to work. You know, maybe only 1 out of 10, maybe 2 out of 10 
Federal employees in DC are actually back in the office working.
  Next, I would decentralize the Federal Government. There are many 
functions of the Federal Government that could be better and less 
costly if we would move them out of this environment.
  Next, I would implement term limits for political appointees as well 
as long-term employees.
  I think there are opportunities for Agency consolidations. We can 
modernize the IT system. We are spending 80 percent of $100 billion 
annually on an outdated IT system here in the Federal Government. The 
opportunities that we would save financially with regulatory reform are 
infinite. We could roll back energy mandates, EPA limits, methane 
emission rules. We could expand Federal land leasing for oil and gas 
production.
  Next, I would talk about cutting subsidy waste--getting rid of some 
of the tax credits. For instance, taxpayer-funded electric vehicle 
subsidies could be done away with. Why in the world are we giving tax 
credits to foreign entities? So we have foreign countries, foreign 
entities that are benefiting from some of these tax credits as well.
  Our grant oversight is just pitiful in the spending of money. With 
the NGO research grants, we don't know who is spending it and where it 
is going. Then we are funding billions of dollars on gain-of-function 
research and teaching China how to develop weapons against Americans. 
The biodefense program for the NIAID is spending over $2 billion 
annually, again, to help communist China develop bioweapons against 
Americans. We need more research accountability.
  There are opportunities for education reform. Then, with the taxation 
and IRS reform, we could rescind the $80 billion for IRS funding under 
the IRA act as well. Certainly, simplifying tax laws would be a great 
opportunity as well.
  Those are just a few. That is just a handful of the ideas that we 
have passed on to DOGE and to President Trump's team, and we look 
forward to working with them. I think it is enough said. Enough is 
enough. It is time for Federal Agencies and unelected bureaucrats to 
remember that we the people sign their checks and that DOGE is 
absolutely committed to restoring accountability and putting the 
Federal Government back on the path to serving the American people. 
These solutions will give beltway bureaucrats fits--it will give them 
heartburn--but these reforms will finally put the Federal Government on 
notice and on a path to start working like a business.
  I will close with this. DOGE can help us identify and prioritize 
waste. So DOGE is going to help us identify and prioritize the waste, 
the fraud, and the mismanagement, but it is up to Congress to put their 
gloves on, roll up their sleeves, and get the work done.
  I yield the floor.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Missouri.
  Mr. SCHMITT. Mr. President, I rise to speak about the grave threat 
that the administrative state poses to our country and what we can do 
to stop it.
  I want to thank the Senator from Oklahoma for sort of leading the 
effort here today to talk about this and to air this out on the Senate 
floor. Quite frankly, one of my big surprises, I think, in my first 2 
years here in the U.S. Senate, is how little we actually talk about 
this and how little time we have spent addressing this.
  So many of the conversations that happen inside the beltway here are 
so detached from the conversations that I have back home in Missouri. 
Quite frankly, the people whom I talk to who work hard every day can't 
believe the waste that happens here. They can't believe we spend 
millions of dollars on drag shows and DEI trainings in countries 
halfway around the world. If they knew more about it, my guess is it 
would be an even bigger topic of conversation; there would be more 
outrage. I think that is part of what the table setting is going to be 
over the next 6 months or so here, which is to identify these things, 
talk about them, highlight them, and do something about it.
  Last year, when I gave my inaugural speech on the Senate floor, I 
talked about how the administrative state was one of the biggest 
threats to our to Republic. Nameless, faceless bureaucrats who are 
accountable to nobody, promulgate rules and regulations that deeply 
impact everyday Americans every day.
  The EPA can promulgate a rule that devastates farmers. A farm that 
has been in a family for generations can be under water just like that, 
and they don't even know whom to talk to about it.
  Ranchers are impacted.
  None of these folks are ultimately ever held accountable. You don't 
know

[[Page S59]]

their name. Their title is ambiguous, and they are in an Agency you 
have never heard of.
  The Loper Bright case that the Supreme Court just recently heard 
dealt a significant blow to the power of the administrative state. It 
involved NOAA, which was attempting to force fishermen in that case to 
pay out of their own pocket for Federal observers on their own boats. 
There are many, many more examples than just this particular case, but 
this one made it to the Supreme Court. They had an impactful decision. 
Real Americans--real Americans--have been impacted by this bloated 
bureaucratic mess that has developed over the decades.
  While the administrative state is still a great threat to our 
country, the good news is that President Trump will soon occupy the 
White House. DOGE will soon get to work, and we can finally have some 
real momentum to dismantle the administrative state once and for all, 
returning the power back to the people.
  You see, the difference is, when the Senator from Oklahoma gets 
elected or I get elected, the folks get a say. They can send us back or 
they can send us home. If you want to ban gas stoves, we should have to 
vote on that. My guess is, it would receive very few votes. But if you 
have got a bureaucrat that is not even in an office anymore--because 
only 6 percent of them are actually in the office--making these kinds 
of decisions, you lose every sense of accountability, and our 
representative form of government is ultimately undermined.
  To ensure that President Trump and DOGE hit the ground running, 
yesterday, I introduced two bills that are a critical one-two punch in 
dismantling the administrative state.
  The first bill is called the ERASER Act, which prohibits any Agency 
from issuing a rule unless the same Agency has repealed at least three 
rules. Additionally, the bill prohibits an Agency from issuing a major 
rule unless the Agency has repealed three or more rules and the cost of 
the new major rule is less than or equal to the cost of the rule that 
is being repealed.
  This would make Agencies think twice before promulgating new 
regulations, and because Agencies are addicted to the power that comes 
from regulating Americans, it could have the added benefit of stripping 
many regulations from the books altogether and freeing Americans from 
the bonds of overregulation.
  The second bill is called the Separation of Powers Restoration Act, 
which builds on the Supreme Court's ruling in the Loper Bright case and 
the tearing down of the Chevron deference that we have lived with for 
decades. This bill would enact a stricter standard of review. No longer 
can Agencies expect the courts to just side with their interpretation 
of the statute, like they could when the Chevron deference was in 
place.
  This bill would institute a de novo standard of review. Under a de 
novo standard of review, courts will weigh the merits of the arguments 
without deference--without deference standards--to either side, placing 
American citizens and businesses, either caught on the wrong side of 
regulatory enforcement action or challenging the validity in the first 
place, on equal footing in a court with that Agency. This is a critical 
effort, which will strip power away from the unelected bureaucrats and 
put the power back in the hands of Americans.
  I look forward to working hand in hand with the Trump administration, 
Elon Musk, Vivek Ramaswamy, and my colleagues in the DOGE Caucus to 
finally reform and dismantle the administrative state, shrink the size 
of the Federal Government, reinstitute fiscal sanity here in 
Washington, and stop these Agencies from burdening American citizens 
with onerous regulatory schemes.
  I yield the floor.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Oklahoma.
  Mr. LANKFORD. Mr. President, as this body knows well, for the past 
hour, we have had multiple colleagues who have come to this floor to be 
able to talk about how do we make the government more efficient. They 
have been talking about, out loud, what they are working in their 
offices on, what their staff are working on, and what we plan to be 
able to implement. This is a public conversation, but there is a lot of 
private, behind-the-scenes work because the focus is not just what we 
talk about. It is what we actually get done.
  There are a lot of areas of government efficiency that need to get 
done. This is a target-rich environment. Literally, you can pull out of 
this building and look in any direction you want to any number of 
Agencies and get started there.
  But the focus that we need to have as a body is not what we do to 
talk about government waste but what are we going to do to get it done.
  We are looking forward to President Trump's inauguration in a week 
and a half. We are looking forward to beginning to implement both on 
the executive branch and through legislative action real changes that 
can actually get our government toward more efficiency.
  Now, I have to warn everybody: It is going to take a while because 
there is a lot to get done. But the good news is, we are not just 
talking about it; we are actually going to get something started.
  I yield the floor.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mrs. Blackburn). The Senator from Kansas.


                       Remembering Olen Mitchell

  Mr. MORAN. Madam President, this afternoon I rise here on the Senate 
floor to recognize a fellow Kansan, to honor the life of a soldier, a 
servant, a great man, Olen Mitchell.
  While Olen was born in Oklahoma, Kansas is the place he called home, 
and we are honored to call him our own.
  Growing up in Western Kansas teaches you a lot about discipline, 
service, and hard work, and I know that Olen's time in Elkhart and 
Hutchinson, KS, taught him valuable lessons. The values he learned in 
Western Kansas provided him with a love of country and taught him to 
love his neighbors as himself. His character was further defined 
alongside thousands of other young men like him who fought in World War 
II.

  Olen received a Purple Heart after being shot 2 weeks before D-Day in 
1944 during his service in Italy. Even after being injured, he 
continued his service to his country in the military police. After his 
service, Olen received a Bronze Star, the Combat Infantryman Badge, and 
several other medals and service ribbons.
  In June of last year, I had the opportunity to call Olen on the 80th 
anniversary of D-Day while he was visiting Normandy and seeing the 
beaches of France. It was my honor to thank him for his service during 
World War II and let him know how much of a privilege it was to know 
him and his story.
  The ``greatest generation'' has left a permanent impact on the world, 
and that is why the loss of another World War II veteran is cause for 
mourning in this Nation and around the globe. We remember not only 
their grit, sacrifice, and bravery but also their kindness, their 
dedication, and their humility, which has changed communities across 
America, and changing those communities changed America.
  Olen embodied the compassion, kindness, and courage we all remember, 
and he changed the Hutchinson community for the better. I know every 
time I was in Hutchinson, I had the opportunity to be with him. It was 
just a great experience for me, but you could also tell that those 
around us admired and respected him. He was a pillar in the community 
and so often involved in everything good.
  Occasionally, he would drive me in the Fourth of July parades, and 
you could tell how the community responded not to the U.S. Senator 
going down Main Street but about how good it was for them to see their 
friend Olen.
  He was a loving husband who was married for 68 years until his wife 
passed away. Olen was also an uncle, a great-uncle, and a great-great 
uncle. Three generations of family and loved ones had an exemplary role 
model as an inspirational figure who showed them kindness, love, and 
devotion.
  A few times a year, veterans visit Washington, DC, on Honor Flights, 
and Olen visited our Capital in 2014--10 years ago. Meeting veterans 
during these visits brought me, certainly, great joy, and I am always 
moved by the veterans who see for themselves the memorial built to 
honor their comrades and themselves.
  My own father was able to see the World War II Memorial. Before he 
saw it, I called him to tell him about it. So I am at the World War II 
Memorial

[[Page S60]]

with my flip phone. I call my dad at home in Kansas to tell him I love 
him, I respect him, and I thank him for his service. I told this story 
before. My dad then calls me back and says: Gerald, you left me a 
voicemail, but I didn't understand it. Would you repeat it?
  Olen is no longer in a position in which I can tell him what I told 
my dad, nor is my dad. So on behalf of all of us and communicated to 
Olen and all of his comrades, we today again say: We love you. We 
respect you. We thank you for your service.
  After Olen's passing, the Kansas Honor Flight Foundation shared in 
their post that ``Heaven needed a hero just in time for Christmas.'' 
Olen is a hero to his country, to his family, to his loved ones, and to 
his community. His story will not be and should not be forgotten, and 
the State of Kansas, our country, and the world are forever grateful 
for his life of service and dedication.
  Olen, thank you for your life of service. Thank you for your 
friendship. Thank you for being such a great member of a great family.
  I yield the floor.

                          ____________________

