[Congressional Record Volume 171, Number 9 (Thursday, January 16, 2025)]
[Senate]
[Pages S198-S218]
From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov]




                            LAKEN RILEY ACT


                          Cabinet Nominations

  Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, the Cabinet confirmation process is well 
underway here in the U.S. Senate. Confirmation hearings began this week 
with Defense Secretary nominee Pete Hegseth in the Armed Services 
Committee on Tuesday. Yesterday, we had six confirmation hearings--the 
most confirmation hearings, I might add, in a single day since 2001--
and we have more happening today and tomorrow. By the time President 
Trump takes the oath of office on Monday, the Senate will have held 
hearings for 12 of his nominees, and there are plenty more to come.
  Once the committees complete their work, the process will move to the 
floor, and we will move as quickly as possible on those votes. I hope 
Democrats will provide a level of cooperation that will allow us to 
quickly fill these positions so these nominees can begin their work for 
the American people.
  One of the nominees being considered this week is a familiar face to 
us in the Senate. Yesterday, our longtime colleague Senator Rubio found 
himself on the other side of the dais in the Foreign Relations 
Committee for his hearing to be Secretary of State. Members of that 
committee are well acquainted with Senator Rubio's expertise in foreign 
policy. He has been a leading voice on these issues here in the Senate 
and on the Foreign Relations Committee since he arrived here in 2011, 
and yesterday, his expertise was on full display. Whether he was 
discussing China, the Middle East, Russia, our alliances, or anything 
else, our colleague demonstrated his command of international affairs.
  Marco also clearly laid out the philosophy he will bring to the job. 
He spoke about peace through strength, restoring American leadership, 
and advancing America's interests.
  Our colleague is ready to step into the leadership void that the 
Biden administration has too often left on the world stage. In too many 
instances, the Biden administration has chosen to appease our enemies 
rather than demonstrate strength.
  As yesterday made clear, we can expect Senator Rubio to bring a moral 
clarity to foreign policy that has been sorely lacking in the last 4 
years. That is important--moral clarity--and it has never been a 
challenge for Marco Rubio.
  Take our relationship with China. The senior Senator from Florida has 
been a leading voice on the Chinese Communist Party's malign intentions 
and their implications for the United States. He has been clear-eyed 
about what the United States ought to do to outcompete China in this 
century, and he has been outspoken in calling attention to China's 
human rights abuses. He was a leading voice on China's repression of 
its own people in Xinjiang, and he led the charge on the Uyghur Forced 
Labor Prevention Act in the U.S. Senate. And he didn't stop once it 
became law; he made sure the legislation was being implemented 
properly. He called out companies suspected of using forced labor, and 
he advocated for the Biden administration to do a better job of vetting 
imports.
  All of us here in the Senate know of Marco's unwavering commitment to 
freedom. He has been a strong supporter of freedom fighters in Hong 
Kong, and he has been outspoken in his support for Taiwan as the 
Chinese Communist Party has grown more aggressive.
  He is also a fierce defender of democracy and human rights in Latin 
America. His family watched their native Cuba deteriorate under a 
communist dictatorship, and it was conversations with his grandfather 
about Cuba's plight that drew Senator Rubio into public service. So it 
is no surprise he is one of the strongest defenders of the rights of 
the Cuban people.
  He is also a strong voice for democracy and justice in Venezuela. 
Marco has been outspoken in his criticism of the Biden administration's 
appeasement of the Maduro regime, and he was a clear voice in defense 
of democracy as the country suffered through Maduro's corrupt election 
last year.
  As we heard in his testimony yesterday, our colleague is focused on 
advancing America's interests. As he said, ``Every dollar we spend, 
every program we fund, and every policy we pursue must be justified by 
the answer to three simple questions: Does it make America safer? Does 
it make America stronger or does it make America more prosperous?'' I 
think that is what the American people should expect from a Secretary 
of State and from their government, and anybody who watched his hearing 
yesterday knows that is what we are going to get from Marco Rubio as 
Secretary of State.
  I will have more to say about Marco and other nominees for the Trump 
administration as they move through the process here in the U.S. 
Senate, and I look forward to hearing from each of the President's 
nominees in the near future.
  I yield the floor.
  I suggest the absence of a quorum.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will call the roll.
  The senior assistant legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
  Mr. SCHUMER. I ask unanimous consent that the order for the quorum 
call be rescinded.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered.


                   Recognition of the Minority Leader

  The Democratic leader is recognized.


                   President Biden's Farewell Address

  Mr. SCHUMER. Mr. President, last night, President Biden delivered his 
farewell address, reflecting on his 4 years in office, which will be 
remembered as one of the most productive periods in modern American 
history. Working alongside President Biden for the American people was 
the honor of a lifetime.
  When President Biden took office, America was in crisis. The pandemic 
was surging. The economy was reeling. Our democracy was under assault. 
But President Biden, with good help from Senate Democrats, got right to 
work, and together, I am proud that we achieved one of the most 
ambitious legislative agendas in decades.
  Working with President Biden, we created nearly 17 million new jobs, 
the most in a single term. We passed historic legislation, like Chips 
and Science--that was a baby that I nurtured--the bipartisan 
infrastructure law, and the Inflation Reduction Act. We lowered the 
cost of prescription drugs for tens of millions of Americans. We passed 
the first gun safety law in 30 years. We enshrined marriage equality 
into law. We confirmed 235 well-qualified and historic judges to 
lifetime appointments--more judges than any majority has confirmed in 
decades--and so much more.
  President Biden also left America with a somber warning in his 
address--one that every American should listen to. He cautioned that 
``an oligarchy is taking shape in America of extreme wealth, power, and 
influence'' that will threaten all the progress our country has made in 
the last 4 years.
  President Biden is right. An oligarchy is beginning to take shape in 
America, and you can see it by looking at the incoming Trump 
administration.
  Donald Trump has not even taken office yet, but many of his top 
advisers and Cabinet picks are extremely wealthy people with deep ties 
to corporate special interests. Many of these Cabinet picks seem to see 
the world through the eyes of a very rich and privileged individual--a 
very limited vision indeed. And the agenda they are pushing--tax cuts 
for the ultrawealthy and draconian cuts to the working class--is narrow 
and only furthers inequality in America.
  Donald Trump's agenda would precisely benefit the oligarchy class 
that President Biden is warning about. The progress we have made under 
President Biden's leadership--lower taxes for families, more affordable 
healthcare, investments in infrastructure and energy--should not be 
undone only to assuage the desires of a limited few.
  We Democrats will continue the legacy that President Biden created, 
continue fighting for working families, and make sure that everyone in 
America--not just the uberwealthy--has a fair shot.


                                 TikTok

  Mr. President, now on TikTok, the 170 million Americans who use 
TikTok are rightfully asking the same question: What will happen to the 
app after the ban enters into effect next week?

[[Page S199]]

  Today, I want to say a few words about protecting TikTok's future 
while also protecting America's national security at the same time.
  We aren't against TikTok. We want TikTok to keep going. But we are 
against a Chinese company that is in cahoots with the Chinese Communist 
Party owning TikTok. Unfortunately, TikTok, as it exists today, has too 
many security risks that cannot be ignored. The law passed last year 
was intended to sever TikTok from the influence of the CCP while 
keeping the app available for Americans.
  It is clear that more time is needed to find an American buyer and 
not disrupt the lives and livelihoods of millions of Americans, of so 
many influencers who have built up a good network of followers. That is 
why, last night, Senate Democrats tried to pass a bill that would 
extend the deadline to give everyone more time to come up with a 
workable solution, but Senate Republicans blocked our bill, which is 
stunning because time is running short.
  We will continue to work to find a responsible solution to keeping 
TikTok going, protect American livelihoods, and protect against Chinese 
Communist Party surveillance. We must and can do all three. I have made 
my views clear to the current administration, and I will work with the 
Trump administration and with both parties to keep TikTok alive while 
protecting our national security.
  We can all agree that we must protect Americans' privacy from the 
prying eyes of the Chinese Communist Party, but we also should agree it 
must be done in the right way, without risking content creators' 
livelihoods by rushing this process in a premature way. TikTok should 
survive but under new ownership.


                          Cabinet Nominations

  Mr. President, on nominations, this week, the American people have 
gotten their first real look at what is in store for them under a 
second Trump administration, and it is very bad news for the working 
and middle class. Senate Republicans, of course, are in the majority. 
They control, to a large extent, the final outcome of each nominee in 
this Chamber if they stick together. And Donald Trump's hold on Senate 
Republicans, as we have seen throughout the nominations process, is 
very, very strong.
  Even so, there are two reasons why holding these hearings is 
extremely important regardless of outcome. First, they create a 
contrast between the parties. People will see what we stand for and 
what our Republican colleagues stand for as they support Trump's 
nominees. And second, the hearings create a record to hold these 
nominees accountable should they fail on the job down the line--which, 
unfortunately, I think many will, given their meager qualifications.
  The contrast between whom Democrats will fight for and whom 
Republicans will fight for is becoming exceedingly obvious, thanks to 
these hearings. On the Democratic side, we want answers to the things 
Americans are worried most about: What does Donald Trump's agenda mean 
for jobs, for inflation? What are Trump's tariffs going to do to 
people's bottom lines? Will it send prices shooting up?
  And people are going to ask: Are my prescription drugs going to get 
more expensive? They are going to ask: Will our broken tax system 
become even more unfair under President Trump in a way that rigs the 
system for the ultrawealthy? These are the questions Americans care 
about. These are the things Democrats want answers to from President 
Trump's nominees. And in many cases, the answers are very, very 
troubling.
  Second, even if these nominees are confirmed in the end, given that 
Donald Trump's hold on Senate Republicans is so absolute, the American 
people deserve to have a record they can reference down the line.
  Candidly, many of President Trump's nominees are not fit for the job. 
Look at Pete Hegseth. Confirming some of these people would be a 
reckless roll of the dice for our country, but Republicans, under 
pressure from President-elect Trump, seem willing to press ahead 
nonetheless.
  Should the time come that some of these nominees fail on the job, the 
hearings we are holding right now will come back to haunt our 
Republican colleagues because the warnings will have been there from 
the start. By asking tough questions, by getting nominees on the 
record, by establishing that many of these individuals are unfit, these 
hearings will have been the canary in the coal mine that warns everyone 
that some of these nominees are too great a risk.
  So Democrats will continue to uphold our responsibility to scrutinize 
each nominee on the issues Americans care about. We will continue 
asking the tough questions because working people deserve to know whose 
side Donald Trump is truly on. Is it working people, like Donald Trump 
claims, or is it corporate special interests like his nominations all 
too often suggest?
  I yield the floor.
  I suggest the absence of a quorum.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will call the roll.
  The senior assistant legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
  Mr. McCONNELL. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order 
for the quorum call be rescinded.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered.
  The Senator from Kentucky.


                          Biden Administration

  Mr. McCONNELL. Mr. President, earlier this week, President Biden went 
to the State Department and offered a final assessment of his record on 
foreign policy. He insisted that his leadership had ``increased 
America's power in every dimension,'' that we were ``stronger at home, 
stronger in the world, and . . . more capable . . . than we have been 
in a long time.''
  I suspect the only people who buy that assessment were right there in 
the room with the President. No doubt, those watching from further 
afield found those remarks unconvincing. What most of us saw was a 
final rearguard action to cover for an administration that has been in 
retreat for 4 straight years.
  The President's tough talk about Putin is undone by his chronic and 
well-documented fear of escalation--the hesitation and half measures 
that kept critical tools out of Ukrainian hands when they could have 
made a difference. Even his most senior aides inadvertently 
acknowledged the truth. In a legacy-shopping column in the New York 
Times, Secretary Blinken and Secretary Austin say it was ``steadfast 
American leadership'' that rallied the world to ``help Ukraine survive 
the Kremlin's imperial onslaught.''
  To help Ukraine survive. Not to help defeat aggression, not to help 
restore sovereignty, not to help degrade the power of a major 
adversary--just to let Ukraine's resistance languish on the slow drip 
of critical capabilities moving far slower than the speed of relevance.
  Or take this administration's approach to the Middle East. On Monday, 
the President was optimistic about the prospects of defeating Iran's 
terror proxies and restoring credible deterrence under which Israel and 
its neighbors could live in peace. But absent entirely was any 
recognition that it was Israel, not the United States, that has created 
this geopolitical opportunity.
  And no recognition that Israel has done so in spite of the 
administration's best efforts to restrain a sovereign ally's self-
defense. In the 468 days since the horrors of October 7, the 
President's public scolding of a close ally under attack and refusal to 
check the growing anti-Israel streak poisoning his party have exposed 
his ironclad commitment to Israel as something of a hollow gesture.
  This, after a disastrous withdrawal from Afghanistan had given allies 
and partners enough reason to doubt the strength of America's word--and 
his administration's competence.
  And behind President Biden's bluster about ``winning the worldwide 
competition'' with China is a record of paltry investment in the hard 
power America needs to meet aggression and to reassure our allies.
  For 4 straight years, he submitted defense budget requests that 
failed to even keep pace with inflation, let alone the pacing threat of 
the PRC.
  While America's primary long-term strategic competitor extended its 
lead in developing and producing lethal capabilities, the Biden 
administration focused on climate diplomacy. And its signature climate 
protectionism picked avoidable trade fights with allies and

[[Page S200]]

partners we will need to deter or defeat Chinese aggression.
  In light of the PRC's headway and closer alignment with other 
adversaries, America's warfighters are no better equipped today to 
deter and defeat aggression than we were 4 years ago and no more 
certain that the institutions designed to support them actually have 
their backs.
  And from Europe to the Middle East to the Taiwan Strait, the forces 
that wish harm to America, to our people, to our values, to our 
interests, and to our allies have seized an opportunity.
  On Monday, President Biden's foreign policy will end, and a new 
Commander in Chief will have to contend with his staggering failures. A 
new administration will have to clean up the mess their predecessors 
made of American power and American credibility.
  It is no secret that the incoming national security team will take a 
distinctly different approach. The President-elect has expressed 
repeatedly his intention to reorient American national security 
decision making around a simple guiding principle: peace through 
strength. And he would be right to do so.
  His administration's work must begin with restoring American hard 
power and bolstering our deterrent. The world they will inherit is more 
dangerous and more hostile to U.S. security interests than the one he 
left to President Biden 4 years ago.
  The free world is less likely to trust our commitments, and the 
authoritarians convening against us are more likely to scoff at our 
threats. Russia, Iran, North Korea, and the PRC are finding more and 
more that the desire to weaken the United States and undermine the 
order we lead is a shared objective and one toward which they are now 
working together in coordination to weaken the United States.
  As I have counseled the President-elect already, we cannot afford to 
discount this coordination. No matter how loudly others press him to 
embrace retreat and retrenchment, America cannot address grave threats 
to our interests a la carte. And as I have said repeatedly, there is no 
language these adversaries understand more clearly than strength.
  There is no surer way to restore meaningful deterrence against them 
than by investing in our capacity and proving our willingness to impose 
devastating costs.
  It is common to refer to today's challenges as the gravest America 
has faced since World War II, but we certainly don't invest like we 
believe that is the case.
  So here is a good way of looking at it: Beating the axis in World War 
II meant spending 37 percent of our GDP on defense; in the Korean War, 
it took nearly 14 percent; the height of Vietnam, 9 percent; the Reagan 
buildup at 6 percent. Today we are spending 3 percent of GDP on the 
arsenal of democracy.
  Peace through strength must be more than a pithy phrase--vaguely 
tough-sounding but functionally benign. It must instead stand for a 
clear and measurable commitment to rebuild the arsenal of democracy and 
the most lethal fighting forces in the world.

  As chairman of the Defense Appropriations Subcommittee, I take the 
President-elect's commitments very seriously, and I know he knows that 
deterring a war is cheaper than fighting one. And I stand ready to work 
closely with this administration in the current urgent work ahead, 
rebuilding the capabilities and capacity we need in order to credibly 
pursue peace through strength.
  That work, of course, begins with assembling an experienced and well-
qualified team. The incoming administration is right to expect swift 
consideration of Cabinet nominations and broad deference on the 
confirmation of nominees whose credentials and records prove them 
worthy of the highest public trust and whose policy views align with 
the administration's goal.
  Nominees whose professional experience is commensurate with the 
responsibilities of the office and who have demonstrated in detail 
their command of relevant policy will certainly have my vote. I intend 
to support a large slate of nominees who satisfy these conditions. In 
particular, I will vote to confirm nominees to senior national security 
roles whose record and experience will make them immediate assets, not 
liabilities, in the pursuit of peace through strength.
  Our chance to turn the page on the damage of the Biden 
administration's record simply cannot come soon enough.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Hagerty). The majority whip.


                          Cabinet Nominations

  Mr. BARRASSO. Mr. President, I come to the floor today having been in 
a number of hearings involving President Trump's nominees overseeing 
American energy dominance. I tell you, President Trump's energy 
nominees show that this administration that is coming in, the Trump-
Vance administration, is serious about unleashing affordable, 
available, reliable American energy.
  Doug Burgum is President Trump's nominee to be Secretary of the 
Department of the Interior. He is still testifying right now in the 
Energy Committee. He is the son of North Dakota, and his roots run deep 
in the West.
  Chris Wright, who had his hearing yesterday, is President Trump's 
nominee to be the Secretary of Energy. His data-driven leadership and 
creativity laid the foundation for the fracking boom that we 
experienced in this Nation that has fueled American energy 
independence.
  And Lee Zeldin, whom I had the privilege of introducing earlier this 
morning at the EPW Committee, well, he is a nominee to be the 
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency. He is a lawyer; 
he is a veteran; and he is a former star Member of the House of 
Representatives. He is going to cut redtape. He is going to balance 
environmental stewardship with sensible energy production.
  All three of these nominees are excellent choices to carry out 
President Trump's ``all of the above'' energy strategy. They all have 
my vote.
  Like most Americans, President Trump and his nominees understand that 
energy policy is the foundation of our Nation's future and our success. 
It is linked directly to the prices that we pay, to the technology that 
we create, and to the world in which we live.
  Unleashing American energy means lower prices, means more innovation 
at home, and it means more safety and security for our citizens.
  Well, we have seen it before. Affordable, reliable energy was the 
rocket fuel for American security and prosperity, and we saw it during 
the first Trump administration. But over the last 4 years, Democrats 
restricted and regulated and tried to reduce American energy 
production, instead of unlocking its full potential. Their America-last 
energy strategy policies led to painfully high prices and a more 
vulnerable nation. I think energy was on the ballot this year, and 
energy won.
  Fortunately, President Trump is placing a premium on energy 
production. He is already laying the groundwork to take the handcuffs 
off of American energy production. On day one, I expect the President 
is going to sign a blizzard of Executive orders to bring back American 
energy dominance. First day priorities include ending the Democrats' 
electric vehicle mandate, more drilling on Federal lands, and resuming 
exports of U.S. liquefied natural gas.
  This is certainly good news for my home State of Wyoming. Wyoming is 
America's energy breadbasket. Oil and gas is our bread and butter. We 
have world-class reserves of coal. We have world-class wind. We have 
benefited from American energy dominance, and our Wyoming tough energy 
workers made it all possible. Wyoming energy workers now stand ready to 
unleash American energy once again.
  I hear my colleagues on the other side of the aisle preach doom and 
gloom about energy independence. The Democrat leader here on the floor 
said yesterday Chris Wright, who is the President's nominee for the 
Secretary of Energy--he called this nominee an energy extremist. Why? 
Because Chris Wright believes ``oil and gas make the world go round.'' 
Well, it does.
  This is the depth of the Democrats' climate delusion. Oil and gas 
drive our economy, produce great jobs, and produce our prosperity. And 
because of American oil and gas, we do it cleaner; we do it safer; and 
we do it more reliably than anyplace else on planet Earth.
  The facts could not be clearer. Since 2005, America has been 
responsible for

[[Page S201]]

66 percent of emission reduction among developed countries. We do it 
better than anyone else in the world. We have reduced more emissions 
than the next six countries combined.
  There is a reason why, and it is not because Joe Biden bribed 
Americans to buy solar panels or buy electric cars. No, it is American 
energy production, American energy dominance. It is because we 
unleashed affordable, available, reliable American energy. For the 
record, we can thank Chris Wright and the fracking boom for unleashing 
a lot of that energy.
  In 2019, America became energy independent for the first time in 50 
years. Why? How did it happen? President Trump did it. With Doug 
Burgum, Chris Wright, and Lee Zeldin on America's team, we are going to 
do it again.
  (The remarks of Mr. BARRASSO pertaining to the submission of S. 140 
are printed in today's Record under ``Submitted Resolutions.'')
  Mr. BARRASSO. I yield the floor.
  I suggest the absence of a quorum.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will call the roll.
  The senior assistant executive clerk proceeded to call the roll.
  Mr. CORNYN. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for 
the quorum call be rescinded.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered.


                          Biden Administration

  Mr. CORNYN. Mr. President, it is 4 days until President Trump will be 
inaugurated for the second time as President of the United States. That 
means we only have 4 more days of President Biden's absentee 
leadership, but he seems to be making the most of his final days as he 
goes out the door, and he certainly isn't letting it kick him on the 
way out.
  I think the most egregious example of the abuse of power, really, 
that President Biden is engaged in, now that the election is over and 
he doesn't have to stand for a vote among the American people--so he 
pretty much has given them a thumb in the eye. Perhaps one of the most 
egregious examples of this was his pardon of his son Hunter on December 
1 of last year.
  Despite numerous efforts by the FBI and DOJ to protect Hunter Biden 
from accountability for his crimes, President Biden decided to attack 
his own Department of Justice and say his son was selectively and 
unfairly prosecuted. Well, it is hard to imagine someone thinking they 
were unfairly targeted when the entire government Agencies did 
everything they could to protect him from coming to justice.
  And thanks to a diligent and careful judge who was able to expose a 
sweetheart deal that would have exonerated Hunter Biden previously, he 
was convicted of illegally possessing a firearm, and he stood charged 
with massive tax fraud.
  President Biden said time and time again: I promise I am not going to 
pardon him. And then he turned around, and he did.
  But he didn't stop there. He used his last days in office to go on a 
little pardon spree, granting clemency to 39 individuals, as well as 
commuting the sentences of convicted murderers on death row.
  These people were convicted of crimes ranging from conspiracy to 
commit wire fraud in a mortgage fraud scheme to stealing government 
property, to signing false documents, bank theft, participating in 
income tax fraud, and the misuse of a Social Security number.
  But the truth is, these are not victimless crimes, and they are not 
the sort of occurrences we want to see happening more frequently. There 
is a reason why our criminal justice system provides for accountability 
and punishment in appropriate circumstances. That is to set an example 
for others not to go down that path and to have some measure of 
accountability, which is an important part of justice.
  These criminals were not the only people that got a last-minute gift 
from President Biden. On January 4, President Biden announced a list of 
19--19--new recipients of the Presidential Medal of Freedom. This 
included George Soros and others.
  George Soros, of course, is a billionaire philanthropist who has 
doled out billions of dollars for leftwing political causes, from 
``defund the police'' movements to anti-Israel organizations, to those 
who promote open borders, such as we have experienced, tragically, over 
the last four years.
  Of course, these are the same policies that have caused so much 
suffering and frustration among the American people, which they voted 
on. I believe it was a referendum on November 5. The people voted to 
change the direction the country was headed in because most Americans, 
according to public opinion polling, felt like America was on the wrong 
path and needed a change of course.
  And now a key architect of those failed policies was awarded the 
Presidential Medal of Freedom. Talk about devaluing an award that is 
supposed to be given for extraordinary service to the country.
  Of course, I support the rights of individuals to be generous with 
their wealth. America is one of the most generous countries in the 
world, and I think it is something we should be proud of.
  I imagine how our colleagues on the other side of the aisle might act 
if Republicans honored a prominent conservative philanthropist. Do you 
think the media or our Democratic colleagues would applaud it in the 
same way? No chance. Conservative philanthropists have been not only 
not given Medals of Freedom, they have been subjected to endless 
scrutiny, including politically motivated subpoenas from our Democratic 
colleagues on the Judiciary Committee, just this last year. But now, 
Democrats are rewarding their own with the Presidential Medal of 
Freedom.
  It is like the hearing we had this morning on the Finance Committee. 
Scott Bessent, the next Secretary of the Treasury, was there. We had to 
listen to the ranking member go on a diatribe about why it is so 
important that American taxpayers be exposed to a multitrillion-dollar 
tax increase. He said this is about tax cuts for the wealthy. But the 
fact of the matter is--and the nominee pointed this out--that the top 1 
percent in the country pay the vast majority of income taxes. But the 
facts, apparently, are not all that important to our Democratic 
colleagues.
  President Biden wasn't finished rewarding his friends with grants of 
clemency and Presidential honors before he left office. He also sent a 
parting gift to one of his favorite beneficiaries, which are radical 
climate activists.
  I don't doubt that the climate is changing. I don't doubt humans have 
an impact on it. But to say this is the end-all and be-all of all of 
our policies, to the detriment of our economy, job creation, and so 
many other important issues, just strikes me as misguided.
  One of the consequences is that Americans have been suffering under 
high prices for energy under President Biden's Presidency. Electricity 
prices have risen more than 30 percent. We know that these high prices 
are the direct result of President Biden's policies, which put climate 
activists in the front seat, while working families are left behind.
  But the President couldn't help himself from doing more damage on the 
way out the door. The day after Christmas, President Biden's Energy 
Department finalized new climate regulations that would functionally 
ban almost all natural gas-powered water heaters. Why would he do 
something like that?
  An analysis from the American Gas Association estimates that 40 
percent of customers will be directly impacted by a rule with a net 
cost increase, since they will be required to buy a new electric water 
heater. The AGA notes that the households affected are largely low 
income and senior citizens on a fixed income, who are more likely to 
choose a cost-effective water heater that will now be banned under the 
rule.
  Of course, if people want to buy a more expensive water heater with 
their own money, I have no objection to that. I am all for the freedom 
to do so. But to impose additional costs on seniors who have fixed 
incomes and other low-income families who are struggling to get by 
under the high prices and the 40-year high inflation under the Biden 
administration simply adds insult to injury.
  But President Biden didn't stop there. Two weeks ago, the Biden 
administration gave the State of California permission to enforce zero-
emissions rules for lawn mowers and leaf blowers. This may sound like a 
small thing, but it is emblematic of much bigger things, and it adds 
up. This rule

[[Page S202]]

would prohibit the sale of new equipment under 25 horsepower or 19 
kilowatts that failed to achieve ``zero emissions.''
  Is there no home appliance or device that is safe from this radical 
agenda? The Biden administration has targeted gas-powered cars, gas 
stoves, water heaters, and now they want to get after our lawn mowers 
and leaf blowers.
  As I have said before, I don't have any objection to anyone who wants 
to improve their carbon footprint, if that is important to them, by 
purchasing new low-emissions lawn mowers. God bless them if they want 
to do that. But for working families to have to deal with this mandate, 
who are just trying to keep up with inflation, a new lawn mower just 
might not be in their budget.
  Well, suffice it to say, the Biden administration is working hard on 
the way out the door and wreaking havoc in the process.
  Mr. President, Republicans are taking note. We know that, with 
President Trump being sworn into office next Monday, with new 
majorities in the House and the Senate, things are going to change. The 
American people voted for change, and they are going to see a change--a 
change away from these radical policies and special interest pieces of 
legislation or regulation that hurt the vast majority of Americans for 
the benefit of an ideological agenda.
  One of the tools we are going to be using is something called the 
Congressional Review Act. As the Presiding Officer knows, this is a 
powerful tool which allows a vote of Congress and a Presidential 
signature to essentially veto an administrative Agency rule. There is a 
timeframe. I believe it is 60 legislative days during which we can look 
back and essentially impose a legislative veto of that rule.
  Using this mechanism, Congress can review and rescind regulations 
that it disapproves of, because, of course, many of these regulations 
are promulgated by administrative Agencies that never have to stand for 
election. They never have to appeal to the voters. They never have to 
explain themselves to the voters. They just do what they do, which is 
create more and more redtape and regulation.
  So I am glad we are going to be able to focus, soon after we confirm 
President Trump's Cabinet, on Congressional Review Act regulatory 
disapprovals. I plan on introducing a few of these myself so we can 
reverse many of the Biden administration's misguided regulations. I 
know other colleagues plan to do the same thing.
  President Biden may have been busy over the last few months, since 
the November 5 election, but we are gearing up to be even busier, 
undoing much of the mischief that he has wrought during these last 
couple of months on his way out the door.
  I yield the floor.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Illinois.
  Ms. DUCKWORTH. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to display a 
framed item during my remarks.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered.


                     Nomination of Peter B. Hegseth

  Ms. DUCKWORTH. Mr. President, in these serious times, we need a 
serious candidate to lead our military. We need someone with merit to 
lead our meritocracy, someone with moral strength to be in charge of 
protecting our national strength.
  For all these reasons and quite a few more, I will not be voting to 
confirm the extremely unqualified Pete Hegseth as Secretary of Defense. 
Our troops deserve better than a guy who was seemingly only nominated 
because he used to host Trump's favorite TV show on FOX News.
  I have plenty to say about Mr. Hegseth and the many, many ways in 
which he would degrade our military readiness. It is no secret I 
disagreed with Trump on nearly everything during his first term. Yet I 
still voted to confirm both James Mattis and Mark Esper when he 
nominated them for this very role. The thing is, Hegseth has never led 
thousands of people like Mattis had. He never ran an entire Army like 
Esper did. No, the only thing Hegseth has ever run, he has run it into 
the ground. The only major organizations he has ever led, he has led 
into debt.
  Pete Hegseth is unqualified, he is unprepared, he is unethical, and, 
most of all, he is unfit. Mr. Hegseth may talk about how having had 
dust on his boots makes him worthy of becoming Secretary of Defense. 
Well, as someone who left her boots in a dusty field in Iraq, let me 
tell you exactly why he is unfit to lead our heroes.
  Mr. Hegseth likes to say that our military is a great meritocracy, 
and I agree with that. So let's go over his supposed merits for this 
role.
  The Secretary of Defense oversees the Federal Government's largest 
Agency. They manage a $900 billion budget, along with the 3 million 
servicemembers and civilians who fall under its umbrella.
  During his time in uniform, Pete Hegseth never commanded a unit with 
more than 200 people. Meanwhile, on the civilian side, both 
organizations that he led went into debt. In fact, he so badly 
mismanaged one of them that they had to bring in a forensic accountant 
to clean up the mess that he had made.
  That is it. Those are his only supposed qualifications to head up one 
of the most complex, important organizations in the world.
  Listen, there are plenty of Republicans whose policies I may disagree 
with but whom I would vote to confirm because I know that they, too, 
have spent their lives working to keep our country strong and could 
demonstrate why they are qualified for this role. Mr. Hegseth is not 
one of those people.
  Who knows why Donald Trump picked this guy. Maybe Hegseth's business 
failures make Trump feel better about his own six bankruptcies. Maybe 
it is because Hegseth spent years fawning over Trump on FOX News, and 
Trump's dream Cabinet is a bunch of yes-men who know how to kiss up to 
him on TV--or maybe it is just that all of ``Cadet Bone Spurs''' draft 
dodging has left him with no clue as to what kind of leader our 
military needs.
  Look, at his confirmation hearing on Tuesday, I gave Mr. Hegseth 
every opportunity to show me that I was wrong, to prove that he could 
do this job, that he does know the first thing--or anything--about what 
it takes to take on this massive responsibility of being the Secretary 
of Defense. I asked him basic questions that even the most junior folks 
working in the Pentagon would know, like naming one of the main 
international agreements he would be responsible for leading. He 
couldn't name one. I asked him to tell me just a single country in the 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations. Again, he couldn't give me 
one--and one of those is our longest treaty ally for 190 years--not a 
single one of the 10.
  This was shocking--yet not surprising--from a man whose main form of 
policy education has come from reading the FOX News teleprompter. This 
was pitiful--yet predictable--from a guy who has said that we women do 
not belong in combat, who has dared to claim that the military is 
lowering its standard so that we, the poor, fragile, fairer sex--and, 
God forbid, us moms--can serve. Well, the only standards being lowered 
today are the ones for Secretary of Defense. Our female servicemembers 
have earned the jobs that they are in, unlike Mr. Hegseth who won't 
even say whether he would refuse an unlawful order.
  I have next to me a framed copy of the Soldier's Creed--a poster that 
usually hangs over my desk here in the Senate and has done so for the 
last 8 years. It is the same copy that hung above my bed at the Walter 
Reed Army Medical Center when I spent over a year in the hospital 
recovering from my shoot-down. It is the same poster whose lines I read 
before I was wheeled into each and every one of my surgeries. It is the 
same one whose words were repeated over and over to myself on the days 
when I was in so much pain that I couldn't breathe yet was determined 
to fight my way back to health so I could serve again next to the 
buddies who saved my life. These words helped me find the strength I 
needed when I needed it the most because they reminded me of who I was 
and that I was a proud member of the greatest fighting force on the 
face of the Earth, whose duty it was to live up to the sacrifices of my 
fellow soldiers.
  I would like to quote a couple of lines from the creed right now.

       I will always place the mission first . . . I am 
     disciplined, physically and mentally tough, trained and 
     proficient in my warrior tasks.

  Our troops follow these words every day as we ask them to do the 
hardest

[[Page S203]]

thing imaginable. We ask them to leave their families, to potentially 
never hold their spouses' hands again, to maybe never get to see their 
babies take their first steps. We ask them to do all of that and then 
walk into enemy fire and be good enough, competent enough, qualified 
enough that, regardless of the threat they face, they will still be 
able to do their jobs. We ask them to be so ready for the mission at 
hand that they can still fly that helicopter, still man that ship, 
still fight that fire until their very last breaths.
  Tell me: How can we ask these warriors to train and perform to the 
absolute highest standard if we are going to confirm a guy who doesn't 
seem to care enough to prepare to lead them in any way?
  Listen, these are dangerous times on the geopolitical stage. Our 
adversaries are watching, waiting to see if we really will put in power 
someone so obviously unqualified.
  Mr. Hegseth made a point of saying at Tuesday's hearing that every 
single warfighter should be hired based on performance, readiness, and 
merit. And I agree with him. However, he fails to meet every single one 
of those metrics. He is asking to be handed a job he is not prepared 
for because of his relationship with Donald Trump, but this role is too 
important, our troops' lives too precious to let personal ambitions get 
in the way of the mission at hand.
  So let me close with this: Part of being a leader is knowing when you 
are not competent enough to do the job.
  Well, Mr. Hegseth, you are not technically proficient; you are not 
tactically proficient; and your nomination is an insult to those brave 
enough to be serving our Nation. So you, sir, are a no go at this 
station.
  I am voting no on Pete Hegseth's nomination to be Secretary of 
Defense. If my colleagues care more about keeping our Nation strong 
than genuflecting to Donald Trump, then they should have the courage to 
vote no as well.
  I yield the floor.
  I suggest the absence of a quorum.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will call the roll.
  The legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
  Ms. LUMMIS. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for 
the quorum call be rescinded.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered.


                                  S. 5

  Ms. LUMMIS. Mr. President, I rise today in support of the Laken Riley 
Act.
  Nearly a year ago, Laken Riley--a college girl more than 1,000 miles 
from our southern border--was jogging on her university's intramural 
fields. Also more than 1,000 miles from our southern border, an illegal 
criminal in our country brutally attacked and murdered her in broad 
daylight. For 18 minutes, Laken Riley--that young woman in the prime of 
her life, with boundless potential--fought for her life against an 
assailant who never should have been in this country to begin with.
  The Biden administration's open border policies served the criminal's 
depravity more than Laken's and her family's. In fact, they served the 
criminal every bit as much as they failed Laken and her family. Laken's 
killer easily crossed our southern border with millions of others; and 
when he committed several crimes and was arrested, a Biden 
administration-led ICE made no effort to deport him. Had he been 
appropriately prosecuted for his previous crimes, the Riley family 
would have celebrated Riley's birthday instead of mourning an empty 
chair. On February 22, 2024, it would have been an ordinary day for 
their family instead of the worst day of their lives.
  No family should face the nightmare Laken's family endured, and it is 
our responsibility as lawmakers to correct the glaring failures in our 
system that led to her tragic and preventable death.
  The Laken Riley Act won't bring Laken back, but it is a vehicle for 
turning the Riley family's pain into purpose and partnering together to 
protect American families. This legislation's sole goal is to hold 
known criminal illegal aliens accountable for their actions and enable 
States to bring civil charges against Federal officials who fail to 
uphold our immigration laws.
  Like all of us serving in this body, I came to the U.S. Senate 
because I wanted to make a positive difference for the American people. 
This is one of those opportunities. We have the ability to do that 
right now by getting this bill to the President's desk. Let's honor 
Laken's legacy by passing this bipartisan legislation to protect 
millions of Americans across our country.

  I yield the floor.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from North Carolina.


                     Honoring Officer Michael Horan

  Mr. TILLIS. Mr. President, I rise today to honor the service and 
sacrifice of Greensboro Police Officer Michael Horan.
  On Monday, December 23--2 days before Christmas--Officer Horan was 
the first officer to respond to a call of a man with a firearm at a 
Food Lion supermarket in Greensboro, NC. As Officer Horan entered the 
store and confronted the suspect, the suspect engaged in a struggle 
that eventually led to Officer Horan being shot and killed. The suspect 
fled the scene and led law enforcement on a multiple-county chase. The 
brave men and women from various law enforcement agencies eventually 
apprehended the suspect on Interstate 40.
  Officer Horan personified the very best of law enforcement. 
Greensboro Police Chief John Thompson stated that Officer Horan was ``a 
valued and respected member of the Greensboro Police family.''
  He worked for the Greensboro Police Department since 2017 and had a 
distinguished record of service with the U.S. Coast Guard. As a U.S. 
Coast Guard member, Officer Horan served as a law enforcement officer, 
tactical fast boat instructor, and search and rescue operator for the 
safety and security of the United States.
  Even when he was off duty, he exemplified valor. In 2019, Officer 
Horan received a lifesaving award from the Greensboro Police Department 
for saving a father and son who had been caught in a rip current at a 
beach at Emerald Isle.
  As impressive as Officer Horan was for his exemplary work, it was his 
job as a family man--a loving husband, father, and son.
  One of his colleagues noted:

       One of the main things most people would know about officer 
     Horan, is how much he loved his family.
       He loved his daughter. If you ask anybody in the department 
     to describe him--

  One friend said--

       I feel like his daughter would be in the conversation.

  He loved his family, and he included it in virtually every 
conversation he had with his colleagues.
  He upheld the oath to protect and serve his community and his 
country. He exemplified what it means to be an extraordinary public 
servant, and he made the ultimate sacrifice.
  My deepest condolences go out to Officer Horan's family for their 
tremendous loss, and my condolences go out to the community of 
Greensboro, which lost one of their finest, most decent public 
servants. We will never forget his service.
  Mr. President, Officer Horan actually passed away a year ago last 
December. We were not in session at the time, so I thought it was 
appropriate to recognize the anniversary of his death, but I want to 
talk a little bit more.
  (Mr. BUDD assumed the Chair.)


                            Law Enforcement

  Mr. President, since 2015, when I first took office as a U.S. Senator 
in my home State of North Carolina, we have tragically lost far too 
many law enforcement officers. In fact, we have lost 85 in the time 
that I have been a U.S. Senator, since 2015. This includes deaths 
related to law enforcement assaults, gunfire, vehicular pursuits, and 
duty-related illnesses.
  These officers took an oath to protect and serve our communities. 
These heroes made the ultimate sacrifice, giving their lives to protect 
their communities. I will not get into all the details about each 
officer. What I would ask is unanimous consent to provide a list of the 
following officers since I have been a Member of the U.S. Senate to be 
printed in the Record.
  There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in 
the Record, as follows:

       Inspector Robert James Bowling, Automobile Crash, 2015; 
     Patrol Officer Anthony E. Lossiah, Duty Related Illness, 
     2015; K9 Officer Timothy James Brackeen, Gunfire, 2016; 
     Deputy Sheriff John Thomas Isenhour,

[[Page S204]]

     Struck by Vehicle, 2016; Major Jay Russell Memmelaar, Jr., 
     Heart Attack, 2017; Trooper Brandon Carroll Peterson, Heart 
     Attack, 2017; Sergeant Meggan Lee Callahan, Assault, 2017; 
     Correction Enterprises Manager Veronica Skinner Darden, 
     Assault, 2017; Correctional Officer Justin James Smith, 
     Assault, 2017; Correctional Officer Wendy Letitia Shannon, 
     Assault, 2017; Deputy Sheriff Alexis Thunder Eagle Locklear, 
     Automobile Crash, 2018; Deputy Sheriff David Lee'Sean 
     Manning, Automobile Crash, 2018; Trooper Samuel Newton 
     Bullard, Vehicle Pursuit, 2018; Senior Police Officer 
     Christopher James Driver, Automobile Crash, 2018; Master 
     Trooper Kevin Keith Conner, Gunfire, 2018; Corporal Travis 
     Wells, Automobile Crash, 2018; Master Trooper Benjamin Derek 
     Wallace, Heart Attack, 2018; Police Officer Jared William 
     Franks, Automobile Crash, 2018; Police Officer Jason Barton 
     Quick, Struck by Vehicle, 2018; K9 Officer Jordan Harris 
     Sheldon, Gunfire, 2019; Deputy Sheriff Makeem Rictrell 
     Brooks, Automobile Crash, 2019; Trooper Nolan James Sanders, 
     Automobile Crash, 2020; Deputy Sheriff Sypraseuth ``Bud'' 
     Phouangphrachanh, Covid19, 2020; Senior Detention Officer 
     Alexander Reginald Pettiway, Jr., Covid19, 2020; Deputy 
     Sheriff Ryan Phillip Hendrix, Gunfire, 2020; Correctional 
     Officer II Allen Bruce Trivett, Covid19, 2020; Correctional 
     Sergeant II Michael Robert Flagg, Covid19, 2020; Deputy 
     Sheriff LaKiya Louise Rouse, Covid19, 2020; Correctional 
     Officer III Charles Warren Harris, Jr., Covid19, 2020; 
     Lieutenant Terry Sampson, Covid19, 2020; Correctional Officer 
     III Thomas Daniel Roberts, Jr., Covid19, 2020; Correctional 
     Officer Joseph Lloyd Greinke, Covid19, 2020; Correctional 
     Sergeant III Christopher Eugene Sorrenti, Covid19, 2020; 
     Deputy Sheriff Jared Michael Allison, Automobile Crash, 2020; 
     Police Officer Tyler Avery Herndon, Gunfire, 2020; Master 
     Corporal Norman Odie Daye, Jr., Covid19, 2020; Police Officer 
     Jason Nicholas Shuping, Gunfire, 2020; Associate Warden III 
     Julian Arsenio Priest, III, Covid19, 2020; First Sergeant 
     Timothy Lee Howell, Covid19, 2021; Correctional Lieutenant 
     III Anthony Lynn Hardie, Covid19, 2021; Master Trooper James 
     Brent Montgomery, Covid19, 2021; Sergeant LaShonda Owens, 
     Covid19, 2021; Deputy Sheriff Joseph Brandon Gore, Covid19, 
     2021; Police Officer David Dewayne Parde, Gunfire, 2021; 
     Deputy Sheriff Logan Shane Fox, Gunfire, 2021; Sergeant 
     Christopher David Ward, Gunfire, 2021; Officer Robert Craig 
     Cloninger, Heart Attack, 2021; Deputy Sheriff Dennis Wayne 
     Dixon, Covid19, 2021; Deputy Sheriff Eric Otis Ritter, 
     Covid19, 2021; Correctional Sergeant III Ledell Graham, 
     Covid19, 2021; Probation/Parole Officer II Julie Ann Harper, 
     Covid19, 2021; Police Officer Carl Lee Proper, Covid19, 2021; 
     Captain David Edwin MacAlpine, Covid19, 2021; Police Chief 
     Donald Hall, Covid19, 2021; Sergeant Donald William Ramey, 
     Covid19, 2021; Lieutenant Matthew Eric Dow, Covid19, 2021; 
     Police Officer Julio Cesar Herrera, Jr., Covid19, 2021; 
     Master Deputy William Edward Marsh, Covid19, 2021; Lieutenant 
     William Oscar McMurtray, III, Covid19, 2021; Correctional 
     Lieutenant II Dennis Eugene Boykin, Covid19, 2021; Police 
     Officer Ryan Andrew Hayworth, Vehicular Assault, 2021; 
     Sergeant Michael Shannon McDonald, Covid19, 2021; Police 
     Officer Mia Danielle Figueroa-Goodwin, Automobile Crash, 
     2021; Trooper John Sumter Horton, Struck by Vehicle, 2022; 
     Captain Reginald Kamal Smith, Covid19, 2022; Correctional 
     Officer III Helen Mae Smith, Heart Attack, 2022; Detective 
     Michael W. Godwin, Covid19, 2022; Sergeant Matthew Ryan 
     Fishman, Gunfire, 2022; Deputy Sheriff Ned P. Byrd, Gunfire, 
     2022; Detention Corporal Gregory Thomas Horne, Sr., Duty 
     Related Illness, 2022; Police Officer Gabriel Jesus Torres, 
     Gunfire, 2022; Deputy Sheriff Jose Angel DeLeon, Automobile 
     Crash, 2022; Deputy Sheriff Oscar Yovani Bolanos-Anavisca, 
     Jr., Vehicular Assault, 2022; Deputy Sheriff II Auston Smith 
     Reudelhuber, Automobile Crash, 2023; Sergeant Russell Earl 
     Lavarl Jones, Heart Attack, 2023; Sergeant Philip Dale Nix, 
     Gunfire, 2023; Deputy Sheriff Christopher Johnson, Automobile 
     Crash, 2024; Deputy U.S. Marshal Thomas M. Weeks, Gunfire, 
     2024; Investigator William ``Alden'' Elliott, Gunfire, 2024; 
     Investigator Samuel Poloche, Gunfire, 2024; Police Officer 
     Joshua Eyer, Gunfire, 2024; Major Michelle Lynn Quintero, 
     Weather/Natural Disaster, 2024; Courthouse Security Deputy 
     James ``Jim'' Lau, Weather/Natural Disaster, 2024; Police 
     Officer Michael Horan, Gunfire, 2024; Master Trooper Anthony 
     S. Godwin, Medical Condition, 2024.

  Mr. TILLIS. Mr. President, as we start the 119th Congress, my 
colleague from North Carolina, who is currently presiding--I think we 
both agree that we want to emphasize that Congress has a role in 
supporting and protecting our law enforcement officers across this 
country.
  According to the National Fraternal Order of Police, in 2024, 342 
officers were shot in the line of duty. Of those officers, 50 officers 
were tragically killed by criminals.
  Unfortunately, over the past few years, we have seen shameful 
behavior from certain--and I hope and I pray that it is a minority of 
our society, but we have people out there raising money for fundraising 
runs called the 13.12-mile run. Mr. President, ``1312'' translates into 
``ACAB,'' and on their website, they proudly proclaim that ``ACAB'' 
stands for ``All Cops Are Bastards.'' Let that sink in.
  It is appalling to hear this kind of rhetoric, and it has to stop. 
These dangerous statements not only create distrust and disdain for our 
brave men and women in blue--the vast majority of whom are good, hard-
working people that we all know in our communities--but it has made 
their job to protect and serve more difficult and more deadly.
  We have to do better. We have to protect law enforcement. That is why 
I plan to reintroduce multiple pieces of legislation in the coming 
weeks.
  First among them is going to be the Protect and Serve Act. It makes 
it a Federal crime for anyone who knowingly causes or attempts to cause 
bodily harm or injury to a law enforcement officer. It is amazing it is 
not a crime already. I hope to do so with strong bipartisan support 
when I file the bill and get it passed in this Congress.
  We also must act to punish criminals who intentionally murder law 
enforcement. That is why I will also be introducing the Justice for 
Fallen Law Enforcement Act. This legislation would create a criminal 
penalty for the murder of a local, State, or Federal law enforcement 
officer, punishable with the death penalty or life imprisonment without 
parole.
  I urge all Americans listening to contact your Senators and 
Representatives and tell them that you want to protect law enforcement 
officers and support enhancing penalties for those who would do them 
harm.
  The men and women in blue are heroes. They deserve our support. We 
need everyone in our communities to stand up to these people who would 
not want them in the community, who would not want them to respond to a 
9-1-1 call. Can you imagine that? Can you imagine our communities if 
the logical conclusion of these people, who hate law enforcement 
officers so much that they proudly profess that all cops are bastards, 
publicly to raise money?
  We need to increase awareness, and we need to make absolutely certain 
that every man and woman in blue knows we have their back.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Massachusetts.


                     Nomination of Peter B. Hegseth

  Ms. WARREN. Mr. President, I rise today to urge my colleagues to 
reject Pete Hegseth as the next Secretary of Defense.
  Pete Hegseth is the most unqualified nominee for Secretary of Defense 
in our Nation's history. At his confirmation hearing, Pete Hegseth 
bobbed and weaved to avoid answering just basic questions about his 
record, but what Hegseth failed to account for is that his entire 
record is damning.
  I would like my Senate colleagues, people who are seriously 
considering voting to confirm Pete Hegseth, to think long and hard 
about this decision. We need a Secretary of Defense who will be ready 
at 2 in the morning to give life-or-death national security advice to 
the President. Would you trust Pete Hegseth, who has allegedly been so 
drunk at work events that he passed out on a bus and urinated in front 
of the hotel where his colleagues were staying, to answer that call?
  We need a Secretary of Defense who will help us root out the problem 
of sexual assault in the military. Would you trust Pete Hegseth, who 
has been credibly accused of raping a woman and buying her silence, to 
protect victims of sexual assault?
  We need a Secretary of Defense who will be able to manage the 
Nation's largest Federal Agency, one that oversees almost 3.4 million 
people and a budget of nearly $850 billion a year. Would you trust Pete 
Hegseth, who drove a small veterans nonprofit to the brink of 
bankruptcy, to manage billions of our tax dollars?
  The list of glaring disqualifications goes on and on. Hegseth 
supports requiring every senior military officer to pass a political 
litmus test. This politicization of the military is a slap in the face 
to leaders who have served their country honorably for decades.
  But the point is that Pete Hegseth is not just unqualified for the 
role; he is a walking national security threat.
  We need a Secretary of Defense who will help our country meet its 
recruiting goals--something we are already struggling with. Pete 
Hegseth has said that women in the military ``shouldn't

[[Page S205]]

be in combat at all.'' Mr. President, 300,000 women have served in Iraq 
and Afghanistan since 9/11. Pete Hegseth has now insulted every one of 
them. That is not how a leader of the military will inspire people to 
join our cause.
  When people are responsible for our national defense, we ask 
something extraordinary of them. We ask them to put their lives on the 
line. All three of my brothers served in the military. My oldest 
brother was career military. So I know how important that service is 
and how important it is that we pick the right person to lead our men 
and women in uniform.
  Pete Hegseth claims that our brave women in the military are somehow 
lowering our standards, but it is his lack of qualifications, his lack 
of character, and his lack of judgment that lower the standards for 
Secretary of Defense.
  We need a Secretary of Defense whom we can rely on to keep all of us 
safe. Frankly, it is hard to imagine a worse choice than Pete Hegseth.
  I yield the floor.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Alabama.


                          Trump Administration

  Mr. TUBERVILLE. Mr. President, the last 4 years have been nothing 
short of a national nightmare. The runup to the nightmare began in 
2020.
  After fending off a ridiculous impeachment attempt in the early 
months of 2020, President Trump was riding high, and the economy was 
booming.
  Under President Trump, we saw record levels of low unemployment for 
all Americans, especially among Black and Hispanic Americans. 
Inflation, which is ultimately a tax on the paychecks of hard-working 
Americans, was also at record lows.
  We had the most secure border in history. Dangerous terrorists, 
cartel members, and human traffickers weren't flooding into our 
country. Americans' jobs were more secure because they didn't have to 
compete with millions of foreigners who have entered the country the 
last 4 years trying to steal their jobs. The cost of buying a home was 
also cheaper as a result.
  Under President Trump, we were energy independent. This made the cost 
of living more affordable for all Americans. We were able to power 
American homes, cars, and factories with reliable and abundant energy.
  Those are just a few of the domestic successes that Americans were 
benefiting from under President Trump.
  On the global stage, we finally had stability after decades of 
foreign wars. Under President Trump, there were no new wars. We were 
respected around the world and feared by our adversaries. Russia didn't 
dare invade Ukraine when President Trump was in office. NATO countries 
were told to pay up: Pay your bills. China wasn't imposing its will in 
the South China Sea or across the world. China was contained, and its 
influence was diminishing.
  Under President Trump, the Abraham Accords were signed, bringing 
peace to the Middle East. As we have seen the last few years, achieving 
peace in the Middle East was no easy feat. But President Trump achieved 
it, and he did it quickly. The United States and the world were in 
harmony.
  The left couldn't stand these many successes that President Trump's 
administration was achieving at home and abroad, so they pulled out all 
stops to take him down. That is when the deep state bureaucrats and 
globalist organizations worked together to intensify the COVID-19 
crisis. At the same time, the George Floyd riots erupted and destroyed 
cities across our country. Liberal DAs and politicians didn't do 
anything to stop it. It was absolute anarchy--total chaos orchestrated 
by leftwing politicians, the media, and antifa thugs.
  Meanwhile, the media tried to manufacture a scandal because President 
Trump held up a Bible in front of a historic church, while the rioters 
burning the city of DC were ignored.
  It was all a ploy to take down President Trump and tarnish his 
legacy.
  Before the plot to take out the President was in full swing, we saw 
America achieving heights we had never ever seen before.
  For a moment, the left thought they had bested Trump with the COVID 
sham and the Floyd riots and ultimately by rigging the election. But 
after controlling Biden by hiding him in the basement and then 
installing him as President, the Democrats were like a dog who finally 
caught the car. Once the Democrats took the White House, they quickly 
realized they didn't know how to run the country. It is not quite like 
running a struggle session in a Berkeley classroom or leading an HR 
call for a woke corporation.
  The Democrats had 4 years to show the country they could govern more 
effectively than President Trump, but what have they done? What is one 
thing they have done to make our country better? I can't think of one 
policy, one law or directive that actually benefited the American 
people.
  From day one, Joe Biden and Kamala Harris invited foreigners to 
illegally enter our country. They weren't shy. Joe Biden told 
foreigners to ``surge the border'' and ``You should [all] come.'' While 
the administration opened the border, they shut down the Keystone 
Pipeline, making Americans pay more for groceries and gas.
  The Biden administration engaged in a culture war domestically, 
embracing far-left ideas about sexuality, gender, and race. We have 
been told repeatedly over the past 4 years that men can get pregnant. 
And the Democrats didn't just push woke ideology on adults; they forced 
it on children in their classrooms and on social media.
  They have supported biological men competing in women's sports. They 
are perfectly OK with men sharing locker rooms and showering with 
girls. The Biden administration published a rule that would destroy 
title IX which was created to protect women and girls, all in the name 
of gender equity.
  You know, not only did Democrats wage war on American culture, they 
weaponized our justice system, going after President Trump, 
conservatives, and anyone who dared to oppose their agenda. Just look 
at how they went after the January 6 protesters, pro-lifers with the 
FACE Act, parents at the school boards, and the dozens of illegal 
actions they took against President Trump.
  The Biden administration, with the help of congressional Democrats, 
passed a bunch of bills with names that sound good, but actually they 
harm many Americans.
  Take the Inflation Reduction Act, for example, one of their prize 
bills that they have passed in the last few years. It was a legal way 
to launder money to blue States to bail them out, while red States were 
hung out to dry.
  It pumped money we don't have into the economy, causing the runaway 
inflation we are dealing with today. The administration was also weak 
on the world stage appeasing every interest but the interests of the 
American people. This administration was committed to cozying up to 
Iran by reinstating the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action as if the 
world wasn't already a dangerous place. Why would President Biden's 
administration agree to help Iran improve their nuclear facilities? It 
makes no sense.
  This administration bent over backward for NATO, handing over 
billions of hard-earned American taxpayer dollars with no plan on 
ending the war in Ukraine. It executed a disastrous withdrawal from 
Afghanistan that left 13 servicemembers dead, with many others severely 
wounded. This administration was basically asleep at the wheel.
  Who was running the country? Well, it wasn't Joe Biden. It was clear 
from the 2020 campaign that he didn't have the mental capacity to be 
President. To make matters worse, he spent 570 days, 40 percent of his 
Presidency, on vacation. Instead, the White House was run by a 
committee of leftwing staffers and special interests who ultimately ran 
the country into the ground, and the media and the Democrats were 
complicit. It is truly shameful what they have done to this country in 
the last 4 years.
  But now we are finally turning the page. We are entering a new golden 
age in America with President Trump's return to the White House, and 
this is our last chance at righting the ship the left has steered so 
far off course.
  President Trump will return our country to the values of life, 
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. We will return to the Judeo-
Christian beliefs and principles of the West that made our Nation so 
great. And how should the Senate help return our country to these 
principles?

[[Page S206]]

  We need to confirm every single one of President Trump's nominees as 
quickly as possible. We don't have time to drag our feet on any of 
these nominees. The Democrats never once attempted to block President 
Biden's Cabinet nominees. Zero Senate Democrats voted against any one 
of his picks--zero.
  President Trump needs to be able to exercise the full power and 
authority of his office as soon as he is sworn in, and that requires 
confirming his Cabinet picks.
  It will also require the issuing of Executive orders to undo anything 
that President Biden has done in taking congressional action to put 
these policies in place.
  Expect a flurry of Executive orders, a new offensive idea to rebuild 
our broken country. Expect Executive orders on the border, on 
unleashing American energy, and getting DEI out of our government and 
out of the lives of American people.
  We also need to get behind President Trump on passing one 
reconciliation bill that will secure our border, reignite our energy 
independence, and cut taxes so the American economy can boom again.
  On the global stage, the Senate needs to get behind President Trump 
pressuring NATO, all the NATO countries, to pay their fair share. No 
more military handouts for European countries and no more lighting 
taxpayer dollars on fire on behalf of Ukraine. It is time to get this 
war over with.
  The Senate needs to support President Trump and exert maximum 
pressure on Iran and other terrorist organizations wreaking havoc on 
the Middle East and the West.
  We also need to join President Trump's commitment on shrinking the 
Federal Government through strong congressional action. We will do this 
by working closely with the Department of Government Efficiency, better 
known as DOGE.
  We need to shrink the government, cutting the ridiculous regulations 
that are crushing American small businesses.
  And, finally, we need to focus on accountability. We need to hold 
people accountable for the damage that has been done to our country. We 
need to support the pardon of January 6 protesters who were wrongly 
prosecuted and horribly treated by our justice system.
  We need to step up and fight for pro-life, pro-life protesters who 
were persecuted by the administration under the FACE Act. We need to 
open investigations into DOJ Civil Rights and National Security 
Divisions, and that starts by confirming Kash Patel and Pam Bondi to 
the posts where President Trump needs them and needs them in a hurry.
  We need to be aggressive in these pursuits. Senate Republicans need 
to demonstrate courage and will and resolve like President Trump showed 
on the campaign trail. Are we willing to take a bullet for this country 
like President Trump did?
  Are we willing to take on the fake news media who will try to 
undermine his everyday agenda? The job ahead of us won't be easy. The 
economy is in bad shape, job numbers are down, inflation is sky high. 
Our enemies are on the move abroad and in the interior of our country, 
but the American people chose President Trump and the Republicans for 
such a time like this.
  They gave us a mandate to deliver them from the past 4 years of hell 
that this administration has caused. But now, it is a new day in 
America. The nightmare is almost over. And in a few more days, the Sun 
will rise in America. Greatness awaits us if we answer the call of the 
American people.
  I yield the floor.
  I suggest the absence of a quorum.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will call the roll.
  The senior assistant legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
  Mr. PADILLA. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order 
for the quorum call be rescinded.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered.


                     Southern California Wildfires

  Mr. PADILLA. Mr. President, as you and everybody here knows, a little 
bit over a week ago, fires broke out in Los Angeles County. And some of 
you have reached out in the time since to offer your support, to offer 
your assistance, and even offer condolences for those who have perished 
in this significant disaster. And I want to thank you for your initial 
outreach.
  My colleague Senator Schiff and I have come to the floor today to 
provide you all a little bit of an update and to lay a foundation on 
some of the key issues that we are going to need to work together on as 
we move forward.
  And let me begin by just taking a step back for a second and 
acknowledging that, even before the winds increased last week, we knew 
that the risk of a potential large fire was high. In the midst of a 
historically dry season in Southern California, forecasters predicted 
hurricane-force winds, along with little to no humidity--essentially, a 
dry hurricane condition, if you can imagine that. Californians know 
that when there is a red flag warning, conditions are ripe for large-
scale fires. But what came next, what actually materialized, would 
become the worst natural disaster in the history of Los Angeles: 100-
mile-per-hour winds carrying burning embers from home to home, multiple 
simultaneous fires burning more than 12,000 structures and more than 
40,000 acres.
  And to give you a sense of the area I am talking about, I am talking 
about nearly three times the size of Manhattan. At least two dozen 
people have lost their lives, with more expected as search and rescue 
crews continue to comb through the devastation.
  And over the course of the last week, I have had the opportunity to 
visit command posts and meet with firefighters, had the opportunity to 
distribute meals to many of the victims and to see, to tour, to visit 
the destruction firsthand. Yes, there are survivors, people impacted 
from communities like the Pacific Palisades--some with names and faces 
that you will recognize from television and the entertainment industry. 
But I assure you there are also a lot of other faces and families that 
you won't recognize from the working-class and diverse communities 
throughout Los Angeles County.
  It is people like a woman in Altadena who was 9 months pregnant when 
the Eaton fire burned down not just her home but the new nursery that 
she had prepared. And it is the 66-year-old man who stayed to try to 
protect the home that had been in his family for five decades but who 
was found dead with a garden hose in his hand. You can imagine his last 
moments. It is one of the reasons why I have been saying over and over 
that every house you see is really a home, and every home represents a 
family--a family who now mourns maybe the loss of a relative, maybe the 
loss of their home, or loss of irreplaceable items like family photo 
albums or a wedding dress or baby pictures or a loved one's red, white, 
and blue military burial flag.
  But through the destruction, we have also seen some signs of hope, 
like the firefighter in the Pacific Palisades who offered to go back 
and save two dogs trapped while the neighborhood was still burning or a 
14-year-old Avery who saw the devastation that hit her community and 
created a charity, Altadena Girls, to provide beauty products and 
clothes to her friends so that they could feel like themselves again 
while coping with this disaster.
  Every day we hear stories like this, even in the midst of a disaster, 
people coming to each other's aid.
  But even as I stand here today--as we stand here today--the fires are 
still burning, and the fight continues. Our hearts go out to all the 
impacted families, and they also go out to the heroic firefighters and 
other first responders working tirelessly through multiday shifts to 
put out these fires--not only the brave State and local firefighters, 
but I want to acknowledge the Federal firefighters too. To the State 
and local officials working day and night to protect our State and our 
communities, thank you. And I also want to acknowledge Governor Newsom 
for his steady hand during this time.
  And we are so grateful to our neighboring States who continue to send 
resources. And, no, not just States that are considered blue States 
like Oregon and Washington, but States that many people refer to as red 
States like South Dakota and Wyoming and Montana and Florida, who 
continue to send resources with no strings attached, no conditions. 
This is what we do for each other. There is a reason it is called 
mutual aid.
  And I also want to thank every one of my colleagues who, in 2023, 
helped me

[[Page S207]]

to secure seven C-130 air tankers for California. They were surplus 
military aircraft that California received and paid to retrofit, the 
first of which is already on the scene fighting these fires as we 
speak.
  But soon there will come a time when we need to more than just 
support our response to these disasters; we will need support for our 
recovery. And we expect Congress to support California just as Congress 
has been there for States across the country in their times of crisis, 
with no conditions and no strings attached. Because a recovery isn't 
just a California fight. We are truly in this together as Americans. 
Whether it is wildfires across the Western United States or tornados in 
the Midwest, ice storms in Texas, or hurricanes in the Southeast, 
Mother Nature does not distinguish between red States and blue States 
and neither should our disaster response efforts or our recovery 
efforts. That is why, when tragedy struck just a few months ago from 
hurricanes Milton and Helene, Democrats didn't demand aid be attached 
to some Democratic wish list of priorities. Not for a second did we 
think of attaching strings.
  So when I hear about political jabs and insults on social media while 
my home State is burning, it is not distracting. It is certainly not 
entertaining. It is offensive, and it is dangerous. Because let's be 
clear, in times of crisis, California has always been there for the 
rest of our country. And now we expect our country to be here for 
California.
  If Speaker Johnson or any Member of Congress, for that matter, is 
worried about the Federal debt, let me assure you: California has 
already paid the bill. California, as you may know, is the largest 
economy of any State in the nation. We are the single largest 
contributor of tax revenue to the Federal Treasury by far. In 2022 
alone, California paid $83 billion more to the Federal Government than 
it received.

  So from additional disaster assistance funding to a serious 
conversation about disaster insurance that I am eager to continue, we 
are going to need everyone onboard.
  And to my Republican colleagues who may be wondering whether the 
policy should change about no strings attached, let me remind you that 
this is also a fundamental matter of decency as Americans. It is the 
same decency that my colleague Senator Scott from Florida and my 
colleague Senator Tillis from North Carolina have shown in their public 
comments this last week or that several of my California House 
Republican colleagues have shown by supporting our State's major 
disaster declaration request. They know, as we should all remember, 
that this is about our unity as a nation. So, yes, California will need 
you for the long haul.
  And to President-elect Trump, I, too, invite you to tour Altadena and 
the Pacific Palisades, which, by the way, is about 30 miles from your 
golf course in Rancho Palos Verdes. Come meet the first responders. 
Come meet the families that have been affected by these fires.
  And, finally, I want to speak to the people of California because it 
is, indeed, a long road ahead. And there will be more challenges to 
overcome as we continue the search and rescue phase of this, as we go 
into the environmental remediation and debris removal, and eventually 
the rebuilding of homes and businesses. It is a long road, and there 
will be challenges to overcome indeed.
  But I promise you this: There will be a day when the fires are put 
out, when the homes and entire communities are rebuilt better and more 
resilient than they have been before and the Sun will shine and the 
kids will smile.
  Together--together--we are going to get through this.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from California.
  Mr. SCHIFF. Mr. President, I rise today to address the Senate on 
behalf of the people of California. And I thank my colleague Senator 
Padilla for his leadership during this time of incredible difficulty 
and strain for our fellow constituents.
  The unimaginable has happened, and our hearts are broken--a city 
encircled in a blaze and a perfect storm of fire and wind and with a 
system stretched beyond its breaking point. A natural disaster so 
immense in size and scale it will dwarf any recovery and rebuilding 
effort since the 1906 San Francisco earthquake and fire.
  It is that immense and impending recovery effort that I am asking--I 
am pleading--for your help with today.
  Already, the support that you and the President have given California 
have helped firefighters battle the flames, helped save lives, and 
helped those who lost everything find shelter.
  I want to express my particular appreciation for President Biden and 
what the administration has done, the almost immediate declaration of a 
disaster which unlocked important FEMA and other funding, the 
commitment to match--to provide, really--100 percent of Federal funding 
for the first 6 months of these fire mitigation efforts.
  I am very grateful for what the Congress and the President have done.
  This recovery is going to be measured in years, not months. Even so, 
we must bring a sense of urgency to the recovery and not let it linger.
  When the flames are finally out, the cleanup begins in earnest, and 
the rebuilding moves forward with all haste. After the attention of the 
world has turned away from the raging inferno and its aftermath, ours 
in this body must not because the loss is immeasurable--lives lost, 
homes lost, businesses lost, neighborhoods lost, pets lost, memories 
lost, neighborhoods simply gone in an hour. Entire communities burned 
to ash. Families brought together in grief. Churches and synagogues 
have burned down, but their members still gather as one because amidst 
the darkness and destruction, we have seen rays of hope. For when one 
part of our State is hurting--literally on fire--we all come together.
  First responders from all across our great State and so many others 
rushed to Southern California. A woman I met at a Red Cross at the 
Pacoima evacuation site, so grateful, despite everything, for the 
assistance that she was receiving, for the dignity with which she was 
treated by these Red Cross workers--she told me she plans to set up a 
$10-a-month donation from her monthly Social Security disability check. 
People are dropping off clothes and supplies by the thousands, so much 
that some of these centers are overwhelmed with people bringing 
material by.
  That is the California way.
  This is deeply personal for Senator Padilla and myself. We know so 
many families impacted by these fires because they are our neighbors 
and friends.
  I represented Altadena in the House of Representatives for decades. 
It is a vibrant, diverse community, a city of families, of places of 
worship, and of deep culture and history. When I drove through Altadena 
just a few days ago, the destruction was complete--entire city blocks 
razed. Homes, small businesses, schools gone in just a few minutes like 
some post-apocalyptic scene.
  Driving around that area at night in which small fires still dotted 
the landscape amidst the rubble, it was hard to recognize what I was 
seeing. The place where my wife and I got married burned to the ground. 
So many other community institutions vanished: the Altadena Community 
Church, gone; the Pasadena Jewish Temple, gone, still smoldering, that 
temple, when I saw it, and burning inside like an eternal flame, a 
symbol of God's presence even amidst the unimaginable; the mountains 
above Altadena, once the scene of such beautiful greenery and nature, 
now charred beyond recognition.
  Just like Altadena, much of the Palisades are just gone. Fire ripped 
through this community leveling entire neighborhoods. One bakery owner 
in Topanga described the fires that tore through her community simply 
as ``Armageddon,'' charred cars, burned-out furniture block after 
block.
  These were generational homes and neighborhoods--neighborhoods people 
are proud to be part of and raise their children in, now forever 
changed.
  In Altadena, Victor Shaw was found in his house holding a garden 
hose. He died trying to save his home. His sister Shari barely escaped 
as the house went up in flames.
  One man, Zaire, was separated from his sister who lived next door. 
Amidst the chaos, he was able to evacuate his baby and elderly mother. 
The next day when he returned, he found his sister's car outside her 
home and found her remains in the rubble. ``Evelyn, why didn't you 
leave,'' he asked.

[[Page S208]]

  ``[W]hy didn't you leave?''
  One father refused to leave the side of his son who had cerebral 
palsy, fighting to his last breath. The last words he said to his 
daughter were, ``Baby, I'm getting ready to evacuate, I love you . . . 
Baby, I got to go, the fire's made it to my yard.''
  Anthony Mitchell is a hero.
  Edgar McGregor is well known in Pasadena for his daily trash pickups 
in the foothills. But now, to the community, he will be known for 
something more. In a Facebook group post, he alerted residents 2 days 
before the fires to pack go-bags. When it mattered most, he typed two 
words: ``Get out.''
  ``Get out.'' His simple post may have saved lives.
  People are surviving now but only barely hanging on.
  I spoke with Patricia at one of the shelters on the West Side. She 
stayed a couple of nights in a motel but could no longer afford it, and 
her asthma was making it hard to breathe.
  One firefighter, Jonathan, had been battling the blazes in the 
Palisades since the first night. I remember talking to this L. A. Fire 
Department firefighter, and he had told me he wasn't sure he was going 
to make it out when he was there during the early hours of the fire. I 
asked him what that was like. He said: Well, there were flames in front 
of me and flames behind me. The water was running low. My 
communications were going out. He said it was ``the closest thing to 
hell I can imagine.''
  One family in Altadena who all lived on the same street lost three 
homes. What was once a dream to live so close to each other had turned 
into a nightmare.
  Over the past week, we have seen firefighters--exhausted and yet 
unyielding--waging war to save communities and lives and property.
  And in the last few days, we have seen some hopeful signs as the 
level of containment--particularly of the Eaton fire--has increased; 
more slowly, the containment of the Palisades fire. But we are not out 
of the woods.
  We have seen neighbors helping neighbors. We have seen Angelenos 
opening their doors to strangers left with little more than the clothes 
on their back.
  These are the angels who remind us that even in our darkest hours--
through smoky skies and uncertain times--we do not stand alone because 
what makes this city of Los Angeles so extraordinary--what makes 
California extraordinary--is that we are not defined by our tragedies; 
we are defined by our response to them.
  In Los Angeles, resilience is a way of life. It is what has allowed 
the city to rise from the devastation of earthquakes and floods and 
riots and fires time and again. And we are stronger, more resilient, 
more united, more compassionate.
  This is a moment when we can and must call ourselves to the better 
angels of our nature--the angels that are all around us: the paramedics 
who rescued and evacuated seniors from a nursing home at the edge of a 
fire line, the volunteers I met who showed up at a shelter ready to 
help before anyone even asked, the father who stayed behind to try 
desperately to keep his son alive.
  In the coming weeks, after the fires are extinguished, we will seek 
answers. We must not do so for partisan gain or seeking fault; in fact, 
just the opposite because only with the truth about what went right and 
what went wrong can we arrive at solutions.
  I remember talking to one woman who lost her trailer in the 
Palisades. She wants answers about the lack of water to fight the 
fires. I want to know that too. I want to know if the Federal and State 
resources we are fighting to procure will be enough to stop the next 
potential megafire. I want to know what we can do to rebuild and 
rebuild with speed so the neighborhoods that we lost can be reclaimed 
by the neighbors who have been displaced, and communities can come 
together once more.
  I am grateful for the Governor's efforts to streamline the permitting 
process so people can begin to rebuild and rebuild quickly. And I want 
to know if there is anything more that we can do or could have done to 
save more lives and more homes. We should all want that.
  We should all want to rebuild because Los Angeles is one of our 
Nation's great cities. And to rebuild, we will need your help without 
fanfare or partisan rancor.
  We need your help. Just like we worked together to help rebuild New 
Orleans and Louisiana after Hurricane Katrina, we must do so again 
here. Just like after countless hurricanes struck Florida and the 
South, we rushed in aid. Just this year, after Hurricane Helene, FEMA 
is still on the ground in North Carolina helping those in its 
destructive path. And we won't leave--we can't--until the job is 
finished. That is what we must do here.
  During my time in Congress, I have seen a lot of disaster aid bills. 
Never in my time have I ever considered whether an area votes red or 
blue. When people need help, we get them help. When people are fighting 
to rebuild, we help them rebuild, period. It cannot and should not 
change no matter who is President, no matter who is in charge of 
Congress, no matter who the Governor is or who their Senators are.
  That is my urgent plea today. We need your help desperately.
  Southern California, we will rebuild. We will. But whether we can do 
so quickly will depend on the actions we take in the next few months.
  This big and beautiful diverse city is not just made of steel and 
stone but of people--people who stand together when the skies turn dark 
and rise together when the smoke clears.
  We are going to rise again because it is who we are. And when we do, 
we will show the world what it truly means to be the ``City of 
Angels.''
  I yield the floor.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from California
  Mr. PADILLA. I suggest the absence of a quorum.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will call the roll.
  The senior assistant legislative clerk proceeded to call the roll.
  Mr. DURBIN. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order for 
the quorum call be rescinded.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered.


     10-Year Anniversary of the Passage of Water for the World Act

  Mr. DURBIN. Mr. President, some people in the Chamber who served in 
the Senate may remember my predecessor Paul Simon of Illinois. Simon 
was ahead of his time on so many issues, including the importance of 
clean drinking water and sanitation for the poorest people in the 
world.
  He wrote a book called ``Tapped Out.'' He autographed this copy and 
gave it to me in 1998, many years ago. It certainly was not a New York 
Times best seller, but Paul wrote about what he said was ``The Coming 
World Crisis in Water and What We Can Do About It.'' I read this book 
and reflected on it over the years.
  Some 30 years have passed. How many times do people talk about clean 
drinking water and sanitation? It is so critical to public health and 
so critical to development. Sometimes, we are looking for a big 
solution, a complex solution, when a simple solution is the first thing 
that is needed. Paul Simon realized that and that focusing on providing 
clean drinking water to some of the poorest places in the world can be 
transformative.
  He understood that to avoid conflict between nations, to keep girls 
in school and reduce infant mortality, to improve health and economic 
opportunity, you have to provide people with access to clean water. 
Data supports this. Each dollar spent on clean water and sanitation 
returns between $4 and $8 in economic health and other benefits, which 
is why I decided to do something about it as a Member of the U.S. 
Senate.
  I knew his family, I knew Paul, and I knew the last thing in the 
world he ever wanted was someone to build a statue of his image for 
future generations. But he would have been happy with perhaps the bill 
that I introduced entitled the Paul Simon Water for the World Act, 
legislation that built on an earlier law to improve access to clean 
water and sanitation around the world. Former Representative Earl 
Blumenauer and former Senator Bob Corker, a Republican in Tennessee, 
were my partners on this bipartisan effort.
  Ten years ago, the legislation passed the Senate unanimously--
something that is almost unimaginable today with the politics we live 
with--but that underscored the true urgency and importance of this 
issue. Not only was

[[Page S209]]

this legislation the right thing to do, but it made access to clean 
water and sanitation for the world's poor a development priority for 
the United States.
  As a result of the bills that I introduced with my colleagues and 
sustained bipartisan funding over the last 13 years, American 
leadership has provided first-time, sustainable access to clean water 
to more than 76 million people and access to sanitation to 58 million.
  I can remember a visit I made years and years ago to Port-au-Prince 
in Haiti. It is one of the poorest places on Earth, and of course, it 
is in our hemisphere. A lady who is a medical doctor and administrator 
of a clinic wanted to show me something. They had been having trouble 
with waterborne illness, and a lot of people were sick. Some children 
were dying.
  She said they then decided to build a cistern of pure water and to 
protect it and make sure the village could draw from that water when 
they needed it. She said it has changed everything. The kids aren't 
dying. People aren't sick. Things have improved dramatically. She 
walked out to show me a sewer lid and a pump on it. She said to me, We 
got this from the United States. It had something to do with a man 
named Paul Simon. I laughed almost out loud, thinking for goodness' 
sake. I said, How much did you have to invest in this?
  She said $15,000. That is $15,000 that has saved lives and had made a 
difference, and it was in Paul's name, I was happy to report.
  This is incredible work, and I want to salute my staffer Chris Homan, 
who has traveled around Africa and parts of Asia to see these 
investments. They do make a dramatic difference in the lifestyle of 
people, giving them dignity, giving them life, giving them a future.
  Another such story is from a rural area of Ghana where these kinds of 
programs have already eliminated waterborne illnesses. We can see, when 
visited this project, that the investment--this small investment--by 
the United States made an affordable and sustainable infrastructure 
that families can use for sanitation options and safe drinking water. 
The two have to go hand in hand.
  This investment made a project where a disabled woman lives a place 
where she can find dignity, as the name suggests, for she no longer has 
to crawl through snake-filled fields to use the river.
  But this lifesaving work is far from done. As the climate crisis 
worsens and industrial needs increase, ensuring global access to clean 
water supplies is as important as ever.
  The book might not have been a best seller, but the idea sure was. 
And I sure hope that we continue this modest investment in villages 
around the world that literally saves and transforms lives.
  Around 2 billion people on this planet Earth still lack access to 
safe drinking water, so I hope this historically important, bipartisan 
investment will continue long into the future ahead of us. Lives depend 
on it.
  I yield the floor.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Washington.


                                  S. 5

  Mrs. MURRAY. Mr. President, if you believe we should be able to 
detain and deport undocumented immigrants who have committed serious 
crimes and you took Republicans at their word that the Laken Riley Act 
was necessary for us to do that, you need to know that is already 
Federal law. We can and do already detain and deport immigrants who 
commit serious crimes, and we are not about to change that.
  But Republicans have been ignoring the policies we already have on 
the books to push for a bill that, in its current form, is more 
extreme, expensive, and broad than it first appears. I am very 
concerned that without serious amendments, this bill is rife with 
unintended consequences and powers that could be abused.
  As written, it will drastically undermine civil liberties in this 
country. It will throw our immigration system into absolute chaos by 
undermining any President's authority to shape Federal policy. It will 
cost tens of billions of dollars. And here is the kicker. It will end 
up punishing legal immigrants and diverting resources from detaining 
true threats to public safety.
  First off, let's talk about how extremely broad the language of this 
bill is. Under this bill, you don't have to be found guilty of a felony 
to be detained and deported. That is a huge attack on due process. All 
you need is to be arrested or charged, regardless of whether that is 
something as small as shoplifting a candy bar, regardless of whether it 
may become clear that you are innocent, regardless of whether this 
happened years or even decades ago, and even regardless of whether you 
are a child.
  So let me just underscore that because it is important. This bill has 
no exemption for kids, no cutoff age, no process to keep it in line 
with our general child welfare laws. As written, this bill appears so 
broad that a child could be locked up and put on a plane without their 
parents. With such sweeping language, I am deeply concerned the Trump 
administration could abuse this law to deport Dreamers or our 
farmworkers or other essential workers who, again, may never be 
convicted of a crime.
  And to be fair, it is not just Trump I am worried about because this 
bill is an open invitation for Republican State officials to dictate 
individual case outcomes regardless of ICE, derail national immigration 
policy, and even disrupt international relations.
  Under this bill as written, any State attorney general could wreck 
major humanitarian relief pathways like temporary protected status for 
Venezuelan or Ukrainian nationals. They can seek court orders to deport 
individuals without signoff from ICE. And in some cases, they could sue 
to halt visas from entire countries.
  That is a policy that, by its design, will end up punishing the 
people who are following the law to enter the United States legally. It 
could punish refugees who are fleeing violence. It could punish people 
who come here to engage in trade and in commerce that helps our economy 
grow. It could even punish American citizens if they are hoping to get 
a visa for their spouse.
  With a Federal immigration system that is already too chaotic and 
complicated, just wait until any State AG can overrule ICE, undermine 
the President, and throw thousands of legal--legal--visa applications 
into limbo.
  The bill also promises these lawsuits priority, which could be a huge 
burden on our courts. And if that weren't counterproductive enough, not 
only would this bill as written punish legal immigrants, it will also 
divert resources we need to detain genuine threats to our public 
safety. If ICE is required, as this bill says, to spend resources 
detaining nonviolent--not even convicted--shoplifting cases and the 
like, they will have their hands tied as resources are stretched 
thinner and thinner by an overwhelming number of minor cases, leaving 
them with fewer and fewer resources then to tackle the most serious 
cases.
  That is especially concerning because DHS already does not have 
anywhere near the resources to implement this bill. ICE would need, 
actually, more than three times the current number of detention beds--a 
265-percent increase--for this bill. It would need to execute 80 
removal flights a week, almost double its current capacity, not to 
mention it would need to double ground transportation.
  That all adds up to ICE needing to nearly double its staff, hiring 
over 18,000 additional people. And to give you a sense of how 
unrealistic that is, historically, DHS hasn't been able to onboard more 
than 1,000 people a year.
  And to give you a sense of how expensive this is, ICE estimates it 
will need more than triple its budget in year one--really, closer to 
four times their current funding level. We are now talking up to $83 
billion for this legislation over the first 3 years to implement it. 
That is more than the annual budget for the entire Department of 
Homeland Security. That is a lot of money to spend on a bill that is 
going to cause chaos, punish legal immigrants, and undermine due 
process in America, all while drawing resources away from true threats.
  Make no mistake, there are serious challenges we have at our border. 
There is a serious need for sensible immigration reform. But being 
tough on immigration does not require us to forsake our bedrock 
principles like due process or our moral obligation to keep children 
safe. It does not require us to ignore our common sense and waste 
crucial resources.

[[Page S210]]

  So while I hope to work with my colleagues to improve this bill, as I 
try to improve every bill that I can, I have to say, we have a long 
road ahead to address my deep concerns with the way this bill threatens 
due process and the potential for it to be abused.
  So I strongly urge my colleagues to demand a far more serious 
amendment process on this bill, but more than that, I urge them to 
demand a serious, bipartisan approach to tackling immigration in an 
effective, humane way, one that protects our country and upholds our 
values.


                  Nomination of Robert F. Kennedy, Jr.

  Mr. President, on a very different topic, I wanted a chance to talk 
today about one of the nominees that is coming before us because, when 
I was a very young girl, the polio vaccine was approved, and to this 
very day, I remember my mom saying: Thank goodness. We can now send our 
kids to school and not have to worry they will get sick, be paralyzed, 
or have to live in an iron lung or worse.
  The relief was overwhelming. That is why the fear is so overwhelming 
now that Donald Trump wants RFK, Jr.--an outright, unapologetic, anti-
vax conspiracy theorist--as our Nation's Secretary of Health and Human 
Services.
  Now, I want to be clear. I will not be shy about making my concerns 
quite plain with the American people. That is part of our Senate's role 
to advise and consent to the President's nominees. It is our job to vet 
these nominees and put them through a rigorous process to determine if 
they are qualified to serve.
  That is why I met with RFK, Jr., yesterday, so I could be direct with 
him about my concerns with his anti-vaccine record and so I could 
discuss the other challenges our Nation faces where HHS has a really 
crucial role. I do appreciate his time, and I appreciate the 
opportunity to look for areas of common ground. But as I have said 
already, I oppose his nomination because, regardless of any other views 
he holds, his long history of explicitly anti-vaccine activism is 
utterly disqualifying.
  And I am not the only one who is worried. Even Trump's former FDA 
Commissioner, Scott Gottlieb, has said RFK, Jr.'s agenda ``will cost 
lives in this country.''
  I mean, just imagine if RFK, Jr., was Secretary when COVID struck. We 
still might not have vaccines. After all, he called the COVID vaccine 
the ``deadliest vaccine ever made.''
  This isn't a case where we can just look for areas of agreement or 
hope for the best--maybe drug costs or maybe healthy food. We are 
talking about a conspiracy theorist who is openly antagonistic to 
public health and who will have tremendous authority over Americans' 
lives and their healthcare.
  It is not asking too much to have a Secretary of Health who believes 
in healthy food and believes in vaccines, especially when we are 
already backsliding on vaccines and seeing real and deadly 
consequences.
  We eliminated measles in 2000, but last year we had 16 outbreaks. 
Whooping cough has spiked in the country and in my home State of 
Washington. Polio--even polio--is making a comeback. These are 
dangerous diseases, and RFK, Jr., would let them spread through our 
communities and schools like wildfire. And as any parent knows, when a 
bug goes around a school, it doesn't stop there; it comes home to Mom 
and Dad and baby brothers and sisters, who could be at serious risks.
  So I am here this afternoon to talk some truth to the American people 
about the stakes here and lay out the facts for anyone who might not 
appreciate the serious threat posed by RFK, Jr.
  Maybe you think: Well, he is not talking about vaccines like polio or 
measles, or: He is only asking questions. Except, know this: He founded 
a nonprofit entirely focused on attacking vaccines. RFK, Jr.'s 
nonprofit has made videos promoting falsehoods about vaccines and 
autism and sowing distrust in vaccines, especially among the Black 
community.
  They tried to revoke the emergency authorization for kids' COVID 
vaccines. They sued against measles vaccine requirements, even amid 
measles outbreaks.
  And it is not just RFK, Jr.'s nonprofit that should raise alarm here. 
He has said he doesn't know if the polio vaccine caused more deaths 
than it prevented.
  Or another example: The HPV vaccine has led to a huge drop in 
cervical cancer. RFK, Jr., suggested it increases cancer risk.
  And let's not get cute here with excuses like, well, he is just 
asking questions, because when he says we need to know vaccines are 
safe, he is ignoring the centuries of research we have already done on 
these vaccines. We do know they are safe.
  What is more, he has not just been asking questions. These are 
statements I am going to give you that RFK, Jr., has made. These are in 
his own words. He has said:

       I do believe that autism does come from vaccines.

  He said:

       They get the shot, that night they have a fever of 103, 
     they go to sleep, and three months later their brain is gone.

  Again, he said the COVID vaccine was the ``deadliest vaccine ever 
made.''
  These statements are not just false; they are irresponsible, and they 
are disqualifying. Given his track record, we cannot just hope that if 
RFK, Jr., finally gets power to undermine vaccines--a cause that he 
has, by the way, dedicated considerable time and money and effort to--
that he will just give that up. That is not believable, especially when 
we know the lawyer helping him put together a team has tried to have 14 
different vaccines pulled from the market himself--including, by the 
way, the polio vaccine.
  And if you are thinking, well, he can't really do anything about 
vaccines, you need to think again. If confirmed, RFK, Jr., would have 
tremendous power to undermine vaccines. He could influence FDA's 
approval of medicine and drugs. He could directly appoint people to 
CDC's vaccine board, which influences vaccine coverage and costs.
  He said he will fire top researchers by the hundreds and pause 
infectious disease research for years--a threat far beyond vaccines, I 
would say.
  And let's not downplay the fact that, as Secretary, he would have one 
of the biggest megaphones in the world to spread anti-vaccine 
misinformation.
  Maybe you are someone who thinks: So what if we have more whooping 
cough, or: A lot of people had measles, but they lived. I realize some 
people probably think like that because they have never seen the 
reality of these terrible diseases because vaccines have been so 
effective.
  A nurse recently shared online what whooping cough can do to a baby, 
what she has watched families go through herself. I will warn you: It 
was soul crushing. First, the baby can't stop coughing--not even to 
eat, not even to breathe.
  Then come seizures and strokes, then a breathing tube and a 
ventilator, and finally a machine to take over failing heart and lung 
function, and then they die. That is horrific. That is whooping cough, 
and it is far from the only disease at risk of a comeback. We don't 
want that to happen here in this country or around the globe.
  Let's talk about measles. It is one of the world's most contagious 
diseases. It is easily spread by coughing and sneezing. It lingers in 
the air for hours. You are contagious 4 days before you develop a rash 
and 4 days after. Now, before the vaccine, millions of people caught 
measles annually, meaning thousands were hospitalized, hundreds died, 
most of them young children.
  But this is not just history. Do you want to know what RFK, Jr., 
would do as Secretary of Health? I want you to look at Samoa. Before 
Samoa had a measles outbreak, he was there--he was there propping up 
vaccine deniers and falsely blaming deaths on the measles vaccine. 
After Samoa had a tremendous measles outbreak with over 100 
hospitalized and at least 83 dead, mostly kids, no apology from him, no 
admitting he was wrong. Instead, he doubled down and wrote to the Prime 
Minister suggesting vaccines were part of the problem.
  That is who we want to put in charge of our Nation's healthcare? What 
do we think is going to happen? How many outright lies are we going to 
tolerate? How many deaths before we realize this nonsense is dangerous?
  And, look, the vaccine lies just scratch the surface here. This is 
someone who won't accept that HIV causes AIDS. This is someone who 
thinks chemicals in the water might turn people gay; he said that. This 
is someone

[[Page S211]]

who thinks 5G wireless is being used to ``control our behavior.''
  This is not someone we in the U.S. Senate should be telling the 
American people to trust on healthcare. He is not someone we should be 
handing the levers of power.
  For that matter, the same goes for some of Trump's other healthcare 
nominees who have ignored science and promoted false conspiracy 
theories. His nominee to lead the CRC is an anti-abortion extremist 
with zero public health experience--unless you count peddling the 
conspiracy theory that vaccines cause autism or promoting junk 
healthcare plans. Then you have Dr. Oz, who has been named to lead 
CMS--someone who is known for pushing quack treatments and debunked 
junk science, who will be shaping health coverage for millions despite 
clear conflicts of interest.
  I cannot drive home enough to the U.S. Senate: This is not a game. 
These are not political roles without consequence. They have real power 
over whether Americans can get basic information and healthcare.
  I want to end on this note, and it is important. Vaccines save lives. 
That is not a question. It is not a slogan. It is a fact. If you cannot 
accept that fact; if you cannot be honest with the American people 
about it; if, when parents look to you, worried about their newborn, 
wanting to do what is best for their baby, trusting your advice as a 
public health leader, if you cannot tell them the same truth that 
centuries of science and experience tell us, which is that vaccines are 
safe and effective and lifesaving, then you have absolutely no business 
leading the Department of Health and Human Services. None. That should 
not be up for debate.
  A vaccine denier should not be our highest ranking healthcare 
official.
  I yield the floor.
  I suggest the absence of a quorum.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The clerk will call the roll.
  The bill clerk proceeded to call the roll.
  Mr. JOHNSON. Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the order 
for the quorum call be rescinded.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without objection, it is so ordered.
  The Senator from Wisconsin.


                          Government Spending

  Mr. JOHNSON. Mr. President, I think by now you have seen all kinds of 
different versions of this depressing chart of total U.S. debt.
  Back in 1998--and we will be talking about that year--when Bill 
Clinton was President and we had our first budget surplus since 1969, 
the debt level was about $5\1/2\ trillion.
  When I arrived here in my first year in the Senate in 2011, the debt 
was about $14 trillion. I ran, quite honestly, because we were 
mortgaging our children's future.
  I will talk a little bit about 2014 when President Obama had a 
certain spending level that was up to $17\1/2\ trillion.
  As recent as 2019, before the pandemic, our debt was somewhere around 
$22\1/2\ trillion.
  Today, our debt exceeds $36 trillion on a path toward much higher 
heights.
  If you look at President Biden's final budget here, he is predicting 
our total debt will be $52 trillion in 10 years. This is clearly not 
sustainable. As I said, this is a depressing reality.
  The result of all that debt--one of the many results--was the 
devaluation of the dollar. A dollar you held in 1998 is only worth 51 
cents today. We have basically cut the value of a dollar in half since 
1998. In 2014 when President Obama was President--now the value of that 
dollar is only worth 74 cents. The value of the dollar prior to the 
pandemic, 2019, is now only worth 80 cents. That is why people can't 
afford things.
  This inflation caused by massive deficit spending--this is the 
stealth tax on every American. It is a very regressive tax. It 
primarily hurts people at the bottom part of the income spectrum. 
Wealthy individuals have stocks, and they have other assets that 
inflate as the dollar devalues. So, again, this harm primarily affects 
lower income Americans. The men and women who work are harmed by this.
  This can't go on. This is an outrage. This is a tragedy.
  I just want to ask a bit of a hypothetical here before we talk about 
this chart. Let's say you are an American family of four, and you are 
doing pretty good. You make and you spend about $100,000 a year.
  Let's say the next year, you have a serious illness in your family, 
and all of a sudden, you have major medical bills totaling $50,000. So 
the next year, you spend $150,000.
  Well, let's say you get some good news. That medical condition is now 
solved. Your family member is healed. What would most American families 
do? If their income level stayed the same--around $100,000--I don't 
think they would keep spending at a $150,000 level. They certainly 
wouldn't borrow $50,000 to maintain that spending level. They would 
reduce their spending level back to what it was before the illness, 
right? It would go back to somewhere around 100,000 bucks, maybe a 
little bit more based on inflation. That is not what the Federal 
Government did. This, I know, is shocking most Americans as I am laying 
out the reality of the situation. In 2019, prior to the pandemic, total 
Federal Government spending was $4.4 trillion. Then we had COVID, and I 
think we very unwisely shut down a lot of our economy. It destroyed 
people's businesses. It destroyed people's lives, our miserable failed 
response to COVID. It cost a lot of money. So Washington went on a 
massive spending spree, and in the year of the pandemic, we spent 
actually closer to $6.6 trillion.

  Now, again, if it would have been like a normal family, once the 
pandemic passed, we would have returned to some reasonable spending 
level, but we didn't do that. The last 5 years now, we spent, on 
average, $6.5 trillion. That is $2.1 trillion more than we spent in 
2019. There is no justification for that.
  This last year, we spent a total of $6.9 trillion, $2.6 trillion--
$2.5 trillion higher than the $4.4 trillion. Again, there is no 
justification for that.
  So the question I have been asking is, How do we return to a 
reasonable, prepandemic spending level?
  I will guarantee you that the people who voted for President Trump do 
not expect the Federal Government is going to continue spending at 
President Biden's and the Democrats who have been in charge, at their 
spending levels. This is unacceptable. It is unsustainable.
  So what I have done is, I have laid out a couple different options 
here. Again, I will use another analogy. Let's say that same family of 
four I was talking about with an income of $100,00, let's say they have 
a baby. Now their population, their family size, has increased 25 
percent. I think most people recognize that if that family of four 
could increase their income 25 percent, from 100,000 to 125,000, and 
then tack on an amount for inflation--let's say it is 3 percent 
inflation--up to 128,750, I think most people would recognize now that 
family has been kept whole. They have been made whole. They have been 
able to maintain their standard of living.
  Well, I think the same thing would be true for the Federal 
Government, for Americans living within America, you know, looking at 
different benefits the Federal Government bestows on Americans as it 
extracts our hard-earned tax dollars.
  So I went back to a number of different years prior to the pandemic. 
I went back to 1998. Again, that was the first year we actually had a 
budget surplus since 1969. That is how irresponsible the government has 
always been. But back in 1998, what a magic moment. We actually had a 
budget surplus. That was under Bill Clinton. We spent $1.7 trillion.
  That is obviously too low because we have had inflation, because we 
have had population growth. So what I have done in each one of these 
scenarios here is I have taken the basic spending levels. I have 
increased them based on population growth and inflation, plus I exempt 
Social Security, Medicare, and interest. And I have plugged in 
President Biden's 2025 budget amounts for Social Security, Medicare, 
and interest.
  So the result of that analysis for 1998, for Bill Clinton's spending 
level--I don't think anybody would really argue that Bill Clinton spent 
too little in 1998--if you did that, the increase would be based on 
population and inflation, plus you use today's 2025 Social Security, 
Medicare, and interest expense, you would end up with $5.5 trillion.
  Now, it is not a secret. The reason I chose 1998--I looked at all of 
these

[[Page S212]]

years. Doing that with 1998 spending levels, if you compare that to 
President Biden's budgeted revenue for this year, which has not 
decreased because of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act--the revenue has 
consistently increased to $5.5 trillion--we would have a balanced 
budget. What everybody says is impossible to achieve, going back to 
Bill Clinton's spending levels, increasing them by population and 
inflation and using today's Social Security, Medicare, and interest 
expense would balance the budget. We wouldn't have to increase the debt 
ceiling. We wouldn't be experiencing or threatened by more inflation.
  OK. If that is too reasonable for Washington, DC, let's look at 
another scenario. Let's take a look at Barack Obama's--President 
Obama's--spending levels in 2014. Again, I don't think President Obama 
was spending too little in 2014. I was here. He was spending too much.
  But if you take his 2014 levels, inflate them by population growth 
since then and inflation, using today's Social Security, Medicare, and 
interest, we would be spending $6.2 trillion this year. Pretty 
reasonable. Not a balanced budget, but a whole lot better than the 6.9 
or the $7.3 trillion that President Biden budgeted for this year--a far 
more reasonable spending level.
  But if you don't like that, if that is just too reasonable, too 
aggressive for you, just go back to 2019 when we spent $4.4 trillion, 
increase it by population growth, inflation, using President Biden's 
Social Security, Medicare, and interest, it would be 6.5. I mean, I 
think that is completely unacceptable. That has been the average.
  If we increase that $2.1 above the $4.4 trillion, it would still be a 
whole lot better than President Biden's 7.3 trillion or last year's 
spending of $6.9 trillion.
  How can anybody justify spending at this level when we were only 
spending $4.4 trillion 5 years ago?
  Here is what I am suggesting. Set those other scenarios aside. 
President Trump was just elected. Again, I don't think anybody--
certainly not me. I voted for President Trump. I was not expecting 
President Trump, and I do not expect him, to come into office and 
accept and spend at President Biden's levels. So I would encourage 
President Trump to go back and take a look at the final budget he 
proposed for fiscal year 2021 and look at his estimate for spending in 
2025.
  So I have done the exact same thing. I am using the fiscal year 2025 
estimates from his last budget, but I am using this year's Social 
Security, Medicare, and interest expense. If we do that, we are looking 
at a spending level of $6 trillion.
  So, again, we can look at individual expense items. You can take a 
look at defense, if you don't think we are spending enough on that, if 
it is too risky a world. I mean, somewhere within the range of 5.5, 
which would literally balance our budget, up to 6, $6.2 trillion, that 
is a reasonable base that we ought to include in a budget we will be 
passing this year, and that should drive future spending. That would 
reset spending levels to a far more reasonable level.
  Again, let me just reemphasize, whether we use Bill Clinton's 1998 
spending level, which would result in a $5.5 trillion baseline; Barack 
Obama's 2014 spending levels, which would result in a baseline budget 
of $6.2 trillion; or President Trump's final budget, which would result 
in a $6 trillion spending level, that is a reasonable approach.
  That is what families do. That is what businesses in America are 
forced do. They don't just say: Spend whatever you want. Put 70 percent 
of our spending budget on automatic pilot. We will never look at it. We 
will just spend whatever we want.
  That is how you bankrupt a family. That is how you bankrupt a 
business. That is how we are mortgaging our children's future. It has 
to stop.
  So I am putting everybody on notice. I am on the Budget Committee. I 
am on the Finance Committee. I am going to insist that the budget we 
pass now that Republicans are in control of the Senate returns to some 
reasonable baseline.
  Listen, I am reasonable. I will negotiate. I am not saying this is 
gospel; this is etched in stone. But President Trump, our majority 
leader, our majority leadership, House leadership, they are going to 
have to justify to me how you would justify spending more than these 
reasonable baselines.
  I ran in 2010 because we were mortgaging our children's future. I 
remember doing parades, shouting that. ``We are mortgaging our 
children's future.'' It is immoral. It has to stop. We are spending 24, 
25 percent of GDP at the Federal Government level. That is not the 
vision of our Founding Fathers, of sovereign states where government is 
primarily at the State level, at the local level, where it is close to 
the people, where it is more efficient, it is more effective, and it is 
more accountable.
  Now Washington is gobbling up all of our resources, borrowing these 
vast amounts of money, devaluing our currency. They are not solving 
problems. They are not reducing poverty. They are not making lives 
better. They are putting American lives at risk.
  And as Government grows, our freedoms recede. And Americans have to 
understand that of all the things that have made this country great, 
the men and women who have worked and built this marvel of a nation, 
the one essential ingredient they have always used is just that, 
freedom. It is freedom that allowed them to dream and aspire and build 
and create this marvel of a country. It is freedom that will allow 
these young people sitting in front of me here to do the same thing.
  But as long as government continues to grow, those freedoms will 
necessarily recede. It is a direct relationship. So we have allowed 
government to grow way too large. It influences far too much of our 
lives, negatively influences it.
  We need to jealously guard our freedom. We need to jealously reclaim 
our freedom. And the best way to do that is to shrink the size, the 
scope, and the cost of the government and its influence over our lives. 
And the only way you do that is you have to reduce total spending by 
the Federal Government. This is the metric. We talk about all kinds of 
things. That is the metric.
  And one final point: We are not going to be able to tax our way out 
of this. We don't have a taxation problem; we have a spending problem. 
I want to make my final comment, the refuting of the false narrative 
that we hear ad nauseam from the other side. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act 
did not cause our deficits. When the CBO scored that, the score at the 
time it passed was that it was going to reduce revenue and increase our 
deficits by $1.5 trillion. And CBO then after passage, I think April of 
2018, projected out revenue for 10 years. If you take a look at that 
revenue from 2018 to 2024, we actually have the actual results. They 
projected about $27 trillion worth of revenue over that 7-year period. 
The actual amount of revenue we raised from 2018 to 2024 was $28.7 
trillion. We beat CBO's estimate by $1.7 trillion. So if the original 
score is 1.5 trillion--it was--in 7 years, we actually beat their 
estimate by 1.7. We paid for that tax cut in 7 years, plus $200 
billion.
  And we had the severe COVID recession in the middle of that. So don't 
believe anybody that tells you that Tax Cuts and Jobs Act caused our 
deficits. They didn't. They paid for themselves in less than 7 years 
and then some.
  We have a spending problem in this country. There is no justification 
for going from $4.4 trillion to $6.5 trillion, and now we are at 6.9 
with no end in sight.
  This is immoral, what we are doing to our children. We have got to 
get this under control, and this is about as good a rationale, as good 
a justification for setting some dollar limit and using the budget 
process unlike we have ever used it before, not just for being able to 
pass some kind of reconciliation package with a mere majority vote but 
actually use the budget the way American families and American 
businesses do to set the spending limits.
  And then ask our committees and the chair of our committees to take 
those budget caps seriously and figure out how they can structure 
spending, how they can structure these programs to actually live within 
those budget caps, and, again, if they actually used Bill Clinton's 
1998 spending level and inflate it the way I have done here, actually 
balance the budget.
  That is what the people who came out in November voting for President

[[Page S213]]

Trump, that is their goal. That is their expectation. I suggest we live 
up to their expectations.
  I yield the floor.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. Ricketts). The Senator from Kansas.


                         Tribute to Tom Brandt

  Mr. MORAN. Mr. President, for the past 8 years, I have benefited from 
the service, hard work, and loyalty of my communications director and 
deputy chief of staff Tom Brandt.
  Tom has worked in three congressional offices and is well-known and 
respected in the Senate by reporters, staffers, and my colleagues. His 
career as a staffer on Capitol Hill is concluding, and I am sad about 
that; but he will continue serving the American people as he pursues 
one of his other passions, and that is a passion for space exploration 
and NASA.
  I want to express my gratitude to him for his service to the people 
of Kansas and to me. Tom is from Oakland Park, KS, and comes from a 
long line of Kansans. He embodies Kansas values of hard work, 
determination, and generosity, and I know he learned these traits from 
his role models, his parents Carl and Nancy Brandt.
  You have raised a great son, and I thank you for that.
  His career on Capitol Hill began in Missouri Senator Roy Blunt's 
office, first in the House and then in the U.S. Senate. He earned Roy's 
trust early on as a driver. That is how we often meet some of our best 
members of our staff. And he, too, maintained a relationship with Roy 
during his tenure here in the U.S. Senate. I asked Roy to tell me 
something about Tom, and he said:

       Tom Brandt came to work for me in the House and was such an 
     asset that I asked him to join our Senate press team. Tom 
     always understood how to take advantage of the moment and the 
     value of a clear message. I know Senator Moran and his office 
     will miss Tom when he leaves as much as we did.

  Tom's career took him to work on various campaigns and, eventually, 
back to Capitol Hill where he worked for Kansas Congresswoman Lynn 
Jenkins during her time as the House GOP conference vice chair.
  It was in her office that Tom was able to first pursue his passion 
for NASA. Lynn provided me with some thoughts, in her words, that she 
wanted to share about Tom:

       Tom is one of my all-time favorite co-workers.

  When I asked her--this is me talking now--when I asked her whether I 
should hire Tom Brandt, she said: He is the best I ever hired.

       He is hardworking, honest, intelligent, kind and funny. Tom 
     has a deep appreciation for his home State of Kansas and 
     served it extremely well in his time in my office.

  That is Lynn Jenkins speaking.

       But, in many ways, it was his penance, as you see Tom is 
     perhaps the worst kind of traitor a native Kansan can be--he 
     chose to attend college at the University of Missouri. Tom's 
     interest in NASA and space policy is lifelong.

  Again, Congresswoman Jenkins speaking.

       Years ago, when he worked as my communications director, he 
     requested to handle my office's space legislative portfolio. 
     Given I represented a district with no NASA presence and 
     didn't serve on any committee of jurisdiction, no one [in our 
     office actually handled that topic.] In response, my Chief of 
     Staff told Tom, ``Sure, go for it, but it never comes up.'' 
     Tom did take it and immediately reached out to NASA staff. 
     Soon after, he set up my office's first of many interactions 
     with NASA.

  That is the end of Lynn Jenkins' quote.
  After working in the House and private sector, Tom began working in 
our office in 2017. It became evident to me early on that one of Tom's 
greatest strengths is his ability to quickly build friendships and 
collaborations. He can quickly put folks at ease with his warm smile 
and personality. I always thought that smile, he was smirking at me 
every time I saw him. I got accustomed to that smile as something much 
better than a smirk.
  He will take the time to talk with frustrated constituents to assure 
them they have been heard and that he will do his best to help. And Tom 
always follows through on his promises.
  The relationships he formed over the years expands from everyone--
House Members, U.S. Senators, staff in both places--and these 
relationships have aided Tom in his work.
  Early on in his time in my office, he took a trip to Taiwan and 
established relationships with officials he met in the Taiwanese 
Government, and he maintained those relationships after returning home. 
During the COVID-19 pandemic, Taiwan generously offered to send face 
masks and personal protection equipment to the United States. Tom 
reached out to his individual friends he had made, and he asked them if 
any of that equipment could be sent to Kansas to help the hospitals 
that were in desperate need. Tom's request resulted in Taiwan sending 
100,000 surgical masks to Kansas.
  In a moment of great need, Tom found a way to bring help and aid to 
the people of his home State.
  In his role as communications director--I expected a lot of press to 
be sitting in the Gallery, but I see none. In his role as 
communications director, Tom has been a steadying hand helping me 
untangle my own thoughts and express my positions in a way that is more 
clear and winsome.
  When I have had to speak after taking an unpopular stand or something 
that had caused me to be misunderstood--either on policy or 
legislation--Tom always had my back, advocating for me and my 
positions, even when he had to face the anger of those who disagreed.
  He has helped clear the way for tough but important legislation. I 
would highlight one, the Empowering Olympic and Amateur Athletes Act 
that was born out of our investigation into the abuses of gymnasts and 
other American athletes.
  He has shown compassion toward veterans suffering from illnesses as 
the result of their service, and we worked together to pass the PACT 
Act to help those who had encountered Agent Orange and burn pit 
victims.
  And he has always shown grit and determination, working through the 
night on many occasions, helping me find exactly the right words to say 
to express my position to my constituents and the world.
  As an Eagle Scout, Tom lives by the Eagle Scout motto: ``Be 
prepared.'' He is always prepared with the right answer and for the 
tough questions from reporters, like the time a reporter reached out to 
see if ``Senator Jerry Moran was playing golf with Vice President 
Pence.'' Tom, in all his wisdom, responded, ``Mike Pence golfs?''
  Again, he has the gift to communicate.
  While I congratulate Tom on his new job at NASA, his absence will be 
felt not only by me and by our team but by his many friends and 
colleagues on Capitol Hill.
  Tom, we will miss your communications and policy expertise, your 
humorous quips and one-liners, your loyalty to the Kansas City Chiefs 
and Red Friday, and, above all, your friendship and passion for making 
the world a better place for Kansans and Americans.
  I will miss, Tom, our nearly daily walks as I come over here to vote. 
It is a difficult job to be a comms director for a Senator who almost 
always shies away about visiting with reporters. Thanks for helping me 
explain my errors and celebrating our accomplishments. You had no 
responsibility for the errors and a great deal to do with the 
accomplishments.
  Thank you for doing your job so well--pretty good for a Mizzou grad.
  I yield the floor.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Oregon.


                 Unanimous Consent Requests--Amendments

  Mr. MERKLEY. Mr. President, I have come to the floor to talk about 
the impact of the Laken Riley bill upon children here in the United 
States of America and to suggest that we have a debate over several 
amendments designed as to how to more appropriately treat our children 
who reside here in the United States so we do not end up doing 
significant injury to them, which I very much believe is going to be 
the result if we proceed without some changes.
  But let me start just by noting that my thoughts are--as I think the 
thoughts of every Senator are--with Laken Riley's family.
  Whenever there is a tragedy--no tragedy should happen, whether it is 
perpetuated by a citizen or it is perpetuated by an immigrant. 
Americans should be safe in their communities. It is absolutely clear 
that we need comprehensive, commonsense immigration reform.
  Here in the Senate, Democrats and Republicans worked together back in

[[Page S214]]

2013 to pass just such a bill--an enormous investment in border 
security 12 years ago, approved in this body by Democrats and 
Republicans together. That bill never got a hearing in the House of 
Representatives. So I hope we will, in fact, try to resurrect the 
spirit that inspired us 12 years ago in this coming year for 
comprehensive reform.
  This particular bill is very troubling in how it impacts children. I 
am troubled that a bill of such consequence and, quite frankly, legal 
complexity was brought to the floor without going through a committee. 
Really, here in the Senate, the way to do responsible work on 
complicated, consequential bills is to have them go before a committee 
so the committee can bring in all the experts necessary to resolve 
disputes and misunderstandings about how the bill might work. From that 
common understanding, needed reforms can be implemented. But here on 
the floor of the Senate, where often only one or two of us are here at 
a time, there is no such consideration. We can't bring experts to the 
floor here to resolve these issues.
  My colleague from Alabama is here today, and when I propose that we 
consider certain amendments, I anticipate that she is going to object, 
although I will try to persuade her otherwise with the logic of my 
presentation. But I would say that the core point stands that this bill 
is consequential, it is complicated, and the potential impact on 
children is dramatic. So let's work to prevent something really awful 
from happening here in our country because I know that is not the 
intent of my colleague.
  This bill as written requires ICE officers to detain individuals who 
have neither been charged nor convicted of a crime--neither charged nor 
convicted. Children imprisoned without being charged or convicted of a 
crime--that is what this bill does.
  In the current system, children can be, in fact, detained, but it is 
at discretion on the front end and discretion on the back end to 
understand the whole of the circumstances. Is the individual a flight 
risk? Does the individual pose a risk to the community? Are we talking 
about an assault with a deadly weapon or are we talking about grabbing 
and eating an apple while walking down the aisle of a grocery store? 
That discretion is obliterated in this bill.
  If a 5-year-old girl in either of our States--I am from Oregon, and 
Senator Britt from Alabama--gets hungry and grabs that apple, the Laken 
Riley Act says that young girl, if arrested, must be put into an ICE 
prison--must be, without discretion--and there is no provision in the 
bill to get that girl out. There is no required review.
  This is an obliteration of everything we understand about due 
process. A child arrested but never charged because there was, in fact, 
in the end, no evidence--no conviction because since there is no 
evidence, there is no trial--is still sitting in prison without 
recourse, in an ICE prison.
  This is not the America I know, and I don't believe this is the 
America my colleagues across the aisle want. So I come here to say 
let's work together to fix this bill. That is what we are looking to do 
today.
  I have three amendments. I will explain each of the amendments before 
I ask unanimous consent to set aside the pending amendment so that the 
amendment can, in fact, be debated and voted on.
  The first amendment excludes children from this bill. If the idea is 
that mandatory detention should apply to adults, then let's exclude 
children. Children would still be subject to potential detention that 
exists under the current law at the discretion--in fact, under current 
law, they can be detained with discretion even just for an arrest, 
before they have been charged or convicted, but there is discretion 
involved.
  I know of no case in which there has been permanent, mandatory 
imprisonment of a child who has only been arrested and never charged 
and never convicted in the entire history of the United States of 
America, and we are about to change that. That is wrong.
  So, Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to set aside the pending 
amendment so I can offer my amendment No. 73; that there be up to 15 
minutes for debate on the amendment; and that upon the use or yielding 
back of time, the Senate vote on the amendment without further 
intervening action or debate.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there objection?
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Alabama.
  Mrs. BRITT. Reserving the right to object, Mr. President, with all 
due respect to my colleague from Oregon, he voted against even 
proceeding to this bill. Now he is attempting to force amendments onto 
the bill outside of the bipartisan amendment process that we are 
working through.
  Look, I get it. I understand the frustration when your caucus is 
working and your bill doesn't get called up to be voted on. But the 
truth is, we are working diligently to make sure that all voices are 
heard.
  I also find it really interesting because for the past 4 years under 
the failed Biden-Harris administration's open border policies, I have 
not seen one bill be brought to the floor from this side of the aisle 
to really focus on what is happening to children as a result of these 
policies.
  If you look at our wide-open border, we have had over 468,000 
unaccompanied children come across our border in the last 4 years. When 
you look at the numbers that HHS has put out, they admit to losing at 
least 85,000 children. Where has the outrage been?
  My colleagues and I on this side of the aisle have been diligently 
bringing this to the forefront time and time again, even holding our 
own version of a hearing because we couldn't get our Democratic 
colleagues to shine light on this. How dare they step out of line with 
Biden and Harris and their open border policy and agenda. How dare 
they. They should have. We did, and we will continue to make sure that 
we speak up for these kids.
  When you look at what is happening to migrant children being 
trafficked, in many cases, from drug trafficking, to sex trafficking, 
to stories that are absolutely gut-wrenching and heartbreaking, 
something has to be done, and it begins with making sure that we have 
accountability and that we are taking criminals off our streets.
  It is not just migrant children who have paid the price for the 
failed policies of this last administration; it is American children as 
well.
  Look at 12-year-old Jocelyn Nungaray in Texas, who was brutally raped 
and murdered by two men who never should have been here. Look at Laken 
Riley, who last Friday would have celebrated her 23rd birthday had she 
still been on this Earth. Had this bill been enacted, Laken Riley would 
still be alive.
  This bill is a lifesaving bill. This bill protects children.
  We are going to continue to fight to expose the detrimental impact of 
the Biden-Harris open border policies, and we on this side of the aisle 
look forward to joining with those on the other side of the aisle who 
are willing to make commonsense, targeted reforms to keep Americans 
safe.
  Because of that, I object.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The objection is heard.
  The Senator from Oregon.
  Mr. MERKLEY. My colleague laid out quite a set of factors there, but 
let's not blur the picture. The picture is this: A child came here when 
they were 2 months old. They have been here for 12 years or 14. They 
walk out of a store with a group of children. A police officer thinks 
they saw them put something into their pocket and arrests them. It 
turns out they didn't put anything into their pocket. Nothing was in 
there, but they have been arrested. Now ICE is required to indefinitely 
imprison that child--that child in Alabama who was going to be a great, 
outstanding member of their school and of their community--sentencing 
that child, with no charge, no conviction, no crime, to prison. We know 
exactly what harm that type of imprisonment does.
  That is what this amendment is about. I can't take on all of the 
other issues, but I will say that last year, we had a bipartisan group 
develop a comprehensive bill, and my colleagues across the aisle 
blocked it from coming to the floor. But that was last year's debate.
  This is a bill that has a purpose, but I don't think the purpose is 
to wrongly, indefinitely, mandatorily imprison innocent children. So I 
would ask my colleague, while you are objecting now, let's continue 
this conversation because it is that important to fairness in America.

[[Page S215]]

  There is a legal difference of opinion currently, so I am just going 
to describe that. It was sold on the House side by saying that there is 
a settlement called the Flores settlement which will continue to 
protect children and prevent this from happening--an innocent child 
indefinitely detained in prison with no review process.
  But let's turn to the counsel for Flores. The counsel for Flores has 
put out a detailed statement. I have a copy. I understand that other 
lawyers may have other opinions, but these are the experts.
  They say: The Flores settlement does not apply to undocumented 
children in the community. It applies only to children detained in 
Federal immigration custody by DHS under Customs and Border Protection 
or Immigration and Customs Enforcement in certain circumstances and so 
on and so forth. ``Neither the Flores Settlement, nor any other 
existing legal protection, would prevent undocumented children from 
being mandatorily detained by ICE under the Laken Riley Act'' as it is 
currently written.
  It goes on to note and explain that the Flores settlement is a 
consent decree, and law, Federal law, trumps consent decrees.
  It goes on to say that ``children, including toddlers, are not 
exempted from the Laken Riley Act'' and that ``24 states have no 
minimum age for prosecuting children,'' meaning you can be arrested at 
any age, even a toddler.
  So I will ask my colleague not, again, to consider granting consent 
for this amendment, but I would ask that you work with me to explore 
this topic and see if we can fix this problem to our mutual 
satisfaction so we don't do harm to children, if you would consider 
doing that.
  Mrs. BRITT. I will always work with you to talk about how we can help 
children--always.
  Mr. MERKLEY. Thank you.
  We are in the same hallway over in the Hart Building.
  Mrs. BRITT. Neighbors.
  Mr. MERKLEY. I look forward to cooperating on many topics, but this 
is perhaps the most important one at the moment.
  A second amendment that I have creates some of the flexibility that 
exists in current law that doesn't exist under this bill. It requires 
DHS to employ what is referred to as the best interest standard for the 
child. This is a standard that is used in virtually every single State 
in the foster care and child service industry.
  And so the amendment reads--it is nice to have very short amendments. 
It requires DHS to only detain children in a manner consistent with the 
best interest of the child and that does not abrogate, modify, or 
replace protections for children in applicable Federal law, regulation, 
court orders, and decrees--in other words, preserving the flexibility 
that exists in current law, which means could be detained but that a 
judge can consider the totality of the circumstances, the level of the 
crime, whether or not there is a flight risk, whether or not there is a 
potential harm to the community.
  The best interest standard seems like an appropriate thing to apply 
when we are, in fact, collectively striving for the best interest of 
the children.
  So I ask unanimous consent to set aside the pending amendment so that 
I may offer up amendment No. 72; that there be up to 15 minutes for 
debate on the amendment; and that upon the use or yielding back of 
time, the Senate vote on the amendment without further intervening 
action or debate.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there objection?
  The Senator from Alabama.
  Mrs. BRITT. Mr. President, reserving my right to object, we have 
repeatedly confirmed with ICE that all existing consent decrees would 
continue to apply. This amendment addresses something the bill doesn't 
do.
  And as I have said, the Laken Riley Act would protect kids. It is 
bipartisan; it is targeted; and it is common sense. That is why we want 
to keep it that way. I object.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. Objection is heard.
  The Senator from Oregon.
  Mr. MERKLEY. Mr. President, I do disagree with my colleague because 
this bill eliminates the flexibility in the current system to consider 
the totality of the circumstances, and restoring the best interest 
standard that every State is intimately familiar with is remedying the 
lack of flexibility in the bill as it is written.
  But again, we will continue this conversation. I view coming to the 
floor and having this dialogue as kind of a way for us to do something 
that is too rare--way too rare--here in the Senate. We rarely have 
these types of conversations in front of the American people, and I 
think it is important we have them, especially when there is some 
value--that maybe we share the same value but have different 
interpretations of how that value will be impacted. I am sure we share 
the same value on trying not to do kids wrong. That is why I value this 
dialogue with my colleague, and I hope it will lead to the opportunity 
to resolve these issues.
  I have a third amendment, and the third amendment is related to 
another aspect of the way children are affected, including American 
citizen children.
  Imagine the parent who goes to work who is accused--I don't know--of 
stealing a tool out of the factory, and so he is arrested or she is 
arrested. And now, under this bill, that adult has to be locked up--no 
flexibility on the front end--even though it turns out that they did 
not steal the tool; they had nothing in their bag that they had with 
them. The officer thought they did; they didn't. They never get 
charged. They never get convicted so there is no trial. They are 
charged. But that parent who has maybe one, two, three, four American 
citizen children at home waiting for them--they come home from school, 
and no parent comes home. They have to be locked up under this bill.
  So we are not just talking about an impact in this bill on immigrant 
children. We are talking about an impact on citizen children. Now, I 
care about both, but I just want to note that there has been a 
conversation about this bill as if it only affects immigrants. No, it 
affects American citizens too. It affects spouses who might be American 
citizens. It certainly affects the children who are likely American 
citizens.
  So this amendment says that if an adult with children under 17 is 
subject to the mandatory detention that currently has no end, no back 
end to it, has no ability to appeal--it is permanent detention, 
permanent imprisonment--that if they have children at home, after 30 
days, there would be a court proceeding to consider whether or not the 
conditions should exist for release after the normal set of issues are 
considered, such as is this person a danger to the community; is this 
person a flight risk; can they be released with bail--the same things 
we have now--because back at that home are a bunch of children, maybe 
noncitizen children, maybe citizen children, but a bunch of children 
who are going: My parent never came home. I am not just a latchkey kid 
with a parent coming home at 10 p.m. because that is when their shift 
ends; I am a kid who doesn't know what the hell to do now, and my life 
has been shattered.
  So this would create the opportunity for that flexibility that exists 
in current law after 30 days of mandatory detention. I think it is an 
appropriate way to address the potential for impact that I am sure no 
one intended in writing this bill, which was to leave a bunch of 
children back in a home with no parent and no support.
  Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent to set aside the pending 
amendment so that I can offer amendment No. 71; that there be up to 15 
minutes for debate on the amendment; and that upon the use or yielding 
back of time, the Senate vote on the amendment without further 
intervening action or debate.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there objection?
  The Senator from Alabama.
  Mrs. BRITT. Mr. President, reserving the right to object, we have 
heard a lot of things that are untruthful about this bill today. First 
off, no one's due process is taken with regard to their immigration 
proceeding that may be moving and the ability to see the criminal 
proceeding through to the end.
  At the end of the day, we have to make a decision, and that is the 
decision that is in front of my colleagues right now. Are we going to 
protect open border policies or are we going to protect kids?
  I mean, we are seeing, even in this conversation about carveouts and

[[Page S216]]

whatnot--you have got teen migrant gangs running rampant in New York 
City, allegedly running theft rings, with children as young as 11.
  Think about what you do when you think about each one of these things 
we have discussed today. If you were to carve out a certain kid or a 
certain age, you don't make that kid safer; you make them a greater 
target for the drug cartels, for the people looking to move crime.
  We have to make sure that we are taking a commonsense approach to 
this. And at the end of the day, if you don't commit a crime, you are 
going to be good.
  So I am here today to say it is time to pass the Laken Riley Act. It 
is past time to do that--having a commonsense, targeted approach that, 
no, does not fix everything.
  I hear my colleague's frustration with regard to regular order of 
last year. I would like to echo that. You think about what we are 
dealing with right now. We have had over 11 million people come across 
the border under the Biden-Harris administration. Some people say that 
number is much higher. There are at least 2 million that came across 
the border that we don't know who they are, where they are going, or 
what their intentions are.
  You look at the nondetained docket we have here in our country--7.8 
million. You look at those who have been given their due process--1.4 
million have been issued their final orders of removal, meaning they 
have been given their due process, and we have said: You have no legal 
right to be here.
  We have got to do better at tackling every bit of that, and doing 
better starts today. We are not only going to do right by Laken Riley 
and her legacy; we are going to do right by the children of this 
country, making it safer and more secure. That is exactly what this 
bill does. It is a bipartisan piece of legislation, and we must keep it 
strong and keep it that way.
  So on that, Mr. President, I object.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The objection is heard.
  The Senator from Oregon.
  Mr. MERKLEY. Mr. President, I was hoping those last two words weren't 
``I object.'' But this is an important issue that has been raised, and 
we need to look carefully because there is no intention to leave a 
houseful of children home alone when the parent poses no flight risk, 
has committed no crime, poses no risk to the community, and those 
children are being harmed.
  In fact, I do take factual dispute with a few of my colleague's 
points. She noted that no due process had been taken. When you 
eliminate the discretion on the front end, you change due process. A 
judge can no longer say this person is no flight risk, no risk to the 
community, has children at home, so we will put a high bond. They will 
absolutely show up. We know where all their relatives are. And that 
will be best because, if the person is subsequently charged, they will 
be there for trial.
  That due process is stripped away on the front end. There is due 
process in existence now on the back end, where a person can challenge 
their detention and whether or not they should be there.
  In fact, during the previous Trump administration, there were 
children who were released with such challenges, but that is taken 
away. So, yes, due process is dramatically changed, with a huge impact 
on children.
  And my colleague mentioned that we don't want children to be targeted 
for gangs. Amen to that. Who is more of a target for gangs than 
children left alone in the home because their parent has been unjustly 
imprisoned? That does exactly the opposite of what my colleague wants 
to achieve.
  So I know this conversation will continue; at least, I hope it will. 
We are now under a filed cloture motion, which means the majority 
intends to close debate probably on Monday, and yet one Democratic 
amendment has been heard--one. The majority leader has said he wants to 
do things differently; that he wants there to be an amendment process.
  The amendment process I saw when I first came to this Senate 
consisted of standing up and saying: I have a relevant, germane 
amendment. I am asking for the existing amendment to be set aside so 
that mine can be brought up, which puts it in a queue for 
consideration. People can study it. And then you go to a whole series 
of votes on all those things that are in that queue.
  We did this on Dodd-Frank. We did this on ObamaCare. I think we 
should do it here because the consequences are high. But if that can't 
be done, then I would ask my colleague who has worked so hard on this 
particular bill to take a look at whether the Republican side will 
agree to hear these amendments and vote on them. They may be voted 
down, but I think they are important.
  I think it is extremely important that kids not be wrapped up in 
this. They can currently be detained, but it is with discretion of the 
circumstances. I think it is particularly important that we have a 
standard for children in terms of their best interest. I think it is 
particularly important that we have a way, after a few weeks, to have 
some look at whether children who have been left home alone--and if the 
circumstances are appropriate and there is no flight risk, the 
circumstances are appropriate and there is no community risk--to help 
address that situation or we are harming children this was never meant 
to harm.
  So I ask for my Republican colleagues to consider providing an 
opportunity because they--it takes 100 percent. Every single Senator 
has to agree to hear an amendment.
  We used to have the Senate code. The Senate code was: I won't object 
to your amendment. You don't object to mine. They are on the topic 
before us.
  These are on the topic before us. These are not some crazy thing. 
These are addressing core due process issues that affect children. So I 
would ask that at least they get some discussion for the possibility of 
consideration.
  I thank my colleague from Alabama for coming and hearing me out as 
well as--I am not really thanking you for objecting, but I am thanking 
you in the spirit in which I think you want to do the right thing.
  And I will keep striving to convince you that the right thing here is 
we should debate these amendments.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Alaska.


                       Tribute to Kathlene Rowell

  Mr. SULLIVAN. Mr. President, it is nearing the end of the week, and 
normally, that is when I come down to the Senate floor to do my 
weekly--I try to make it weekly--Alaskan of the Week speech.
  Now, I know for the pages, this is their favorite speech of the week. 
You get to hear about Alaska; you get to hear about some great Alaskan 
doing some great stuff. I usually try to give a little update about 
what is going on in our great State because it is always something 
interesting. And then I encourage people watching on TV: Come on up to 
Alaska; you are going to have the trip of a lifetime if you do it.
  So today the Alaskan of the Week is someone very special to me and my 
wife. I am going to talk in detail about all she has done for our 
State. Her name is Kathlene Rowell. And she has worked for me in Alaska 
going on 15 years. The Presiding Officer understands that as a former 
Governor, where you have great staff that do amazing things, not just 
for you and your team but for the whole State.
  Her title in the office has been deputy State director, but she has 
been so much more than that. She has literally been the glue that has 
kept my whole team together, not just since I have been in the Senate 
but even before I became a Senator.
  So I am going to talk about Kathlene real quick here in a minute as 
the Alaskan of the Week. She so much deserves it. Just wanted to 
mention a few things.
  We are all, of course, praying for the people impacted by the fires 
in California. We are all ready to stand by to help. The States are 
coming together. My State is certainly a State that understands natural 
disasters, and, you know, even in Alaska right now, Anchorage just last 
week--didn't make any news down here--was hit with hurricane-force 
winds on Sunday, up to 130 miles an hour. A lot of people--hundreds--
were without power, a lot of property damage. So, you know, we are 
thinking about our Alaskan colleagues who were hit by that hurricane--
there is no other word--typhoon.
  And, of course, praying for everybody in Los Angeles. You know, with 
a State and population that big, we all know people. I have a good 
college roommate

[[Page S217]]

buddy of mine Tom McMillin, my two sisters-in-law Janine and Jennifer, 
they are all being real negatively impacted by that. So we are thinking 
about them.
  In Alaska, I always like to give an update. The Sun is actually 
coming back. We hit the winter solstice. In Anchorage, we are gaining 
about 4 minutes of sun a day; in Fairbanks, we are gaining about 5 
minutes of sun a day; and in about a week, January 22, the Sun will 
rise again in Utqiagvik, AK--Barrow, AK--the top of North America. That 
will be the first time the sun comes up over the horizon in 2 months. 
So they get a dark winter, and it is cold up there.
  The Iditarod, the Last Great Race, is coming up March 2. If you are 
thinking about coming to Alaska, don't think just this summer. Come up 
in the winter, too; it is great. So that is a little bit of update to 
tell what is going on.
  Now, back to Kathlene Rowell, the rock in our office whose last day--
oh, it breaks my heart, breaks my wife Julie's heart. Her last day was 
yesterday.
  So little bit of background about Kathlene. She moved with her family 
to Alaska from Chicago when she was 3 years old. Her father worked in 
the oil fields and had been commuting to Alaska, Illinois, Chicago--
back and forth. He thought it was time for the family to come together, 
so they settled in beautiful Eagle River, AK, a gorgeous--and I mean 
gorgeous--patriotic community, mountainous community right outside of 
Anchorage.
  Kathlene went to Chugiak High. Go Mustangs. She was an excellent, 
driven student. Anyone who knows Kathlene knows that ``excellence'' is 
her motto. Everything she does is excellent.
  But we got confirmation from her good friend Robyn Engibous--on my 
staff, my deputy chief of staff here in DC--who went to school with 
Kathlene and remains very close, that, yes, Kathlene was a straight-A 
student. We knew that. She showed horses. She worked at the coffee shop 
in Eagle River called Jitters, a mainstay in that great community. She 
excelled academically.
  Went to college first in Colorado, then in Washington State. Did a 
semester with the National Outdoor Leadership, which she loved, and 
then came back to Alaska, finished up, and graduated from Alaska 
Pacific University which, very importantly, she did well there. But 
really, really importantly, she met her husband Ben who is a great guy. 
Great guy. They are a great couple.
  So that is Kathlene's early background. She then worked in the parks 
division, division of parks and rec, right at the department of natural 
resources. That is when I first met her. I was the new commissioner at 
DNR--we call it DNR in Alaska; that covers everything in Alaska. We 
worked in the same building. I was a brandnew commissioner, and I was 
looking for a special assistant--a young, smart, talented, special 
assistant--as the commissioner of the department of natural resources.

  Now, this is a big job, right? If Alaska were its own country, it 
would be the envy of the world in terms of resources, strategic 
location, critical minerals, our military, you name it. DNR has a lot 
of responsibility over all these things.
  Matter of fact, not to go on a tangent here, but I had an op-ed in 
the Wall Street Journal today titled ``Greenland Is Nice, but Alaska Is 
Better.'' Goes into all this stuff about how great Alaska is.
  Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that the Wall Street Journal 
Op-Ed, ``Greenland Is Nice, but Alaska Is Better,'' be printed in the 
Record at the end of my remarks. Just to give you a sense of our great 
State there.
  So I needed a special assistant. And I was looking at all these 
resumes and these lawyers and stuff, and here, for the young pages, 
this is the value of what they call an elevator speech. You have heard 
of an elevator speech, right? You have to make a pitch; you have to 
make it quick. So I am getting on the elevator, Kathlene at the time 
she is probably mid, early twenties. She is very young-looking, so then 
she looked a lot younger than her early twenties.
  And she gets on the elevator, and, boy, oh, boy, it was the elevator 
pitch: Commissioner Sullivan, I understand you are looking for a 
special assistant.
  The elevator is going up, all these people are listening: I believe I 
have the qualities, the hard work, the ethics, the commitment to 
excellence to be your special assistant. I would like to come by your 
office and interview.
  Boom, the door opens. I was like, dang, that was impressive. Elevator 
pitch. So she made that. Came in, interviewed, and I am like, I am 
hiring her--none of these gung ho, high-falutin lawyers; I am going to 
put my trust in this young Alaskan. And, boy, oh, boy, I am so glad I 
did. It was the best elevator pitch I have ever seen.
  Kathlene rolled up her sleeves and learned everything she could, and 
before you knew it, she was running the department of natural 
resources, which in Alaska is the giant organization of hundreds and 
hundreds of people, the key to our economy.
  She was working with my other special assistant John Katchen. She was 
hugely essential to the things we got done at our department of natural 
resources. We negotiated against ExxonMobil for a giant natural gas 
deal. You want to talk about a tough thing. Exxon brings in like 25 
lawyers to negotiate against a group of 3 of us, right? We took them 
down.
  She organized summits. She helped us redo our State's oil tax regime, 
which is creating a big spur of development right now. Kathlene was 
essential in all of this, bringing more producers up to Alaska, a great 
teammate. Her heart was in serving our State.
  Fast-forward a few years, I am going to run for the U.S. Senate--not 
an easy run. A lot of good Republicans in the primary. There was a 
Democrat incumbent here; that is never easy. And the first person I 
said I am going to hire on my campaign team, first person, was 
Kathlene.
  Now, it was a risk. She had a 1-year-old at home at the time, 
Benjamin, who is now joined by his brother Niles. By the way, Kathlene 
is a great mom. Her boys are now 12 and 8. When she first started 
working for me, she had no kids. She has got a beautiful family with 
her husband Ben and her two wonderful boys.
  But it was a risk. She had a great State job, and she is going to, 
you know, join this guy throwing his hat in the ring. You know, I am 
not so sure it was looking like an easy deal, but she left her easy--
not easy--her secure State job, the first person I hired on my 
campaign. Organized it. Traveled. And I am pretty sure I would not have 
won without Kathlene's great work. That was in 2014.
  And then she stayed in our office in Alaska, became the deputy State 
director. And you know how it is, she has been with me and my team, my 
wife, longer than any other staff member, and she has done an 
incredible job.
  Now, we all know how important staff are, both here in DC and 
especially back home. They work hard. Let's face it, you know, 
government jobs aren't always the best: You certainly could probably be 
making more money in the private sector; the hours can be grueling. But 
great staff, they are vital to what we do.
  They are vital to the work that we get done here in the Senate, in 
DC, and really vital back home where the work they do for our 
constituents and the places they travel to are essential. They are 
essential.
  And here is a big thing: As you know, the help that our offices back 
home do to work for the people we are honored to represent is vital 
because there are so many giant Federal Agencies--Social Security, the 
VA, IRS, the Department of Defense, Immigration--that are giant 
labyrinths that people don't know how to get through.
  Our Federal Government can be unwieldy and often unforgiving. So when 
Alaskans need help on all those things--Social Security checks; VA 
benefits, we are the State with more veterans per capita than any State 
in the country; Medicare; the IRS comes screwing up something--they 
come to us and we work on these cases.
  This is a rough number, but since I have been in office, our Alaska 
staff has worked on more than 12,000 of these cases, and they are 
really complicated and take hours and hours. We always have at least 
one person attached to these cases, something they will always 
remember, and their lives are impacted by whether they are resolved in 
a good way or bad way.
  And as I am sure you probably believe, you don't always hear about 
this

[[Page S218]]

part of the job of representing people in our great Republic; but in my 
view, it is probably the best part of the job because you have a direct 
impact on someone you represent, and you can literally change their 
lives.
  We do that, we put our heart and soul into it, but nobody has put 
their heart and soul into it more than Kathlene. She has made all of 
this happen, 12,000 cases.
  Now, I also have a fantastic director of constituent services in 
Anchorage, Carrie Keil, who has completed more than 3,600 of these 
cases herself. She is amazing. But here is what Carrie said about 
Kathlene: Kathlene is at the helm of the ship. She is the captain of 
the ship. She makes all of this possible. She is a master communicator. 
Her loyalty and integrity to the people of Alaska are unmatched.
  That is what you want with great staff.
  Margaret Sharpe, she runs our Mat-Su Valley regional area, our 
regional director, Margaret, who does a great job. She calls Kathlene 
our hero: She is our conscience. She is the gatekeeper of decorum. She 
is all about kindness and respect. She keeps all of us kind.
  Isn't that a great compliment? That is from Margaret on my team.
  Elena Spraker, another great member of my team, our Kenai regional 
director on the Kenai Peninsula. Covers Kodiak as well. Elena does a 
great job. She says that she has never worked with anyone with more 
skills than Kathlene. Elaina says, ``Kathlene is our rock,'' and I 
agree. That is so true.

  You know, in our line of work, in elected jobs, whether Governors or 
commissioners or Senators, we all know that certain people have an 
impact that goes way beyond just the work that they do, and Kathlene is 
one of those. She has worked so hard, often at the sacrifice of time 
with her beautiful boys and family and her husband. But she set the bar 
so high on professionalism, in excellence, in everything she does that 
everybody around her--in our Anchorage office, in our Alaska offices, 
in our DC offices--everybody around her, myself included, gets lifted 
up and made better and has improved by being in Kathlene's orbit. Those 
are special people, and that is what Kathlene is.
  Now, she has been a loyal employee, certainly to me and my wife 
Julie. There was a little going-away party for her back home in 
Anchorage, 2 days ago. Fortunately, Julie was able to make it. But 
throughout all, it is not just loyalty to us. It is to the people of 
Alaska, to helping people, to helping our State move forward.
  And, as I said, yesterday was Kathlene's last day. She is going to 
bring these same skills to a really great credit union in Anchorage--
their gain, our loss--but she is always going to be a member of Team 
Sullivan.
  Kathlene, we all say staff is like family here, but Kathlene truly is 
like family for me and my wife Julie. We definitely would not have 
gotten this far without her. We are going to miss her terribly.
  So, Kathlene, thank you. Thanks for your great work. Good luck in 
your new job. From the bottom of my heart and Julie's heart, thanks for 
all you have done for me and Julie, our office, our State, our country. 
And, of course, I hope you are honored by one of the most prestigious 
awards anyone can get in America by being our ``Alaskan of the Week.''
  Congratulations, Kathlene. Godspeed.
  There being no objection, the materia1 was ordered to be printed in 
the Record, as follows:

             [From The Wall Street Journal, Jan. 15, 2025]

             OP-ED: Greenland Is Nice, but Alaska is Better

                         (By Sen. Dan Sullivan)

       There's been a lot of talk about President-elect Trump's 
     idea of buying Greenland. But one U.S. state offers all of 
     Greenland's benefits: Alaska. The problem is that the Biden 
     administration has spent its time trying to turn the Last 
     Frontier into a giant national park rather than recognizing 
     it as a great strategic asset.
       Greenland would provide the U.S. a gateway to the Arctic. 
     But America is already an Arctic nation thanks to Alaska. The 
     Russians and Chinese know my state is at the forefront of 
     great-power competition. In the past two years, there have 
     been 12 air incursions into the state's air-defense 
     identification zone, including an unprecedented joint 
     Russian-Chinese strategic bomber operation, and large-scale 
     joint Russian-Chinese naval task forces in our waters.
       Greenland plays an important part in missile-defense and 
     early-warning networks, but the cornerstone of America's 
     missile defense is Alaska. Any missiles launched by Russia, 
     China or North Korea against the U.S. would likely fly over 
     the state. That's why it hosts the vast majority of America's 
     radar systems and ground-based missile interceptors. To 
     create an Iron Dome for America--a priority of Mr. Trump--we 
     need to add to our national ballistic-missile interceptor 
     capability in Alaska and build a robust layered missile 
     defense and space-based missile sensor capability.
       Greenland is rich in minerals and energy reserves. Alaska 
     is even richer. Our state holds an estimated 40 billion 
     barrels of oil and roughly 235 trillion cubic feet of natural 
     gas. In one field alone, Prudhoe Bay, Alaska reinjects into a 
     reservoir for oil-production purposes as much natural gas 
     each day as Oregon, Washington and California consume.
       Alaska also has a wealth of metals and other minerals, some 
     of which are essential for our national defense, economy and 
     renewable-energy sector. President Biden worked to keep them 
     in the ground. The first Trump administration approved a road 
     needed to access one of America's richest mineral deposits, 
     the Ambler Mining District in Alaska's Interior. The Biden 
     administration killed that road last June. Then Mr. Biden 
     traveled to Angola to announce $600 million to build a 
     railroad to help that country market its critical minerals.
       Buy Greenland? Sure, if the price is right and the Danes 
     are willing to sell. But as Mr. Trump prepares to unleash 
     Alaska's potential again, it's worth remembering what the 
     father of the U.S. Air Force, Gen. Billy Mitchell, once said: 
     ``I believe . . . whoever controls Alaska controls the world. 
     I think it is the most strategic place in the world.''

  Mr. SULLIVAN. I yield the floor.
  The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from South Dakota.

                          ____________________

