[Congressional Record Volume 171, Number 2 (Monday, January 6, 2025)]
[Senate]
[Page S31]
From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov]




                     CERTIFICATION OF THE ELECTION

  Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, in just a few minutes, Senators will head 
over to the Chamber of the House of Representatives to count the 
electoral votes and certify the election of Donald Trump and J.D. Vance 
as President and Vice President of the United States.
  Today, I want to offer my warmest congratulations to President Trump 
and Vice President-elect Vance. They scored a tremendous victory this 
last November.
  Republicans improved our margins in nearly 90 percent of counties in 
the United States and grew support with nearly every demographic group. 
The Republican coalition is broad and strong and growing. Now the work 
begins on delivering on our agenda.
  Mr. President, Republicans are ready to go. We are committed to 
ending the Biden-Harris border crisis, securing our southern border, 
and restoring respect for the rule of law. We are committed to 
restoring American strength to secure our Nation and discourage the 
actors fomenting instability on the world stage. We are committed to 
strengthening our economic and fiscal future, which includes extending 
tax relief for hard-working Americans. We are committed to advancing 
American energy dominance to promote both affordable energy and our 
national security. The list goes on, and we are getting right to work.
  Along with advancing these priorities, we will be focused on getting 
President Trump's Cabinet up and running quickly by ensuring that his 
nominees are speedily confirmed here in the U.S. Senate. The voters 
sent President Trump here with a mission, and we are committed to 
ensuring that he has the people around him that he needs to deliver.
  It has been a tough 4 years for the American people. The Biden 
administration was characterized by a historic inflation crisis that 
left millions of Americans struggling, a border crisis that jeopardized 
our national security, and increasing instability on the world stage.
  But I believe that a brighter future is ahead. I look forward to 
working with President Trump, with Vice President Vance--a Senate 
colleague, I might add--and with Republicans in both Houses to secure 
that brighter future for the American people.

                          ____________________

