[Federal Register Volume 90, Number 5 (Wednesday, January 8, 2025)]
[Rules and Regulations]
[Pages 1636-1752]
From the Federal Register Online via the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov]
[FR Doc No: 2024-31486]



[[Page 1635]]

Vol. 90

Wednesday,

No. 5

January 8, 2025

Part III





Department of Justice





-----------------------------------------------------------------------





28 CFR Part 202





Preventing Access to U.S. Sensitive Personal Data and Government-
Related Data by Countries of Concern or Covered Persons; Final Rule

Federal Register / Vol. 90, No. 5 / Wednesday, January 8, 2025 / 
Rules and Regulations

[[Page 1636]]


-----------------------------------------------------------------------

DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

28 CFR Part 202

[Docket No. NSD 104]
RIN 1124-AA01


Preventing Access to U.S. Sensitive Personal Data and Government-
Related Data by Countries of Concern or Covered Persons

AGENCY: National Security Division, Department of Justice.

ACTION: Final rule.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------

SUMMARY: The Department of Justice is issuing a final rule to implement 
Executive Order 14117 of February 28, 2024 (Preventing Access to 
Americans' Bulk Sensitive Personal Data and United States Government-
Related Data by Countries of Concern), by prohibiting and restricting 
certain data transactions with certain countries or persons.

DATES: This rule has been classified as meeting the criteria under 5 
U.S.C. 804(2) and is effective April 8, 2025. However, at the 
conclusion of the Congressional review, if the effective date has been 
changed, the Department of Justice will publish a document in the 
Federal Register to establish the actual date of effectiveness or to 
terminate the rule. The incorporation by reference of certain material 
listed in this rule is approved by the Director of the Federal Register 
as of April 8, 2025.

FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Email (preferred): 
NSD.FIRS.datasecurity@usdoj.gov. Otherwise, please contact: Lee Licata, 
Deputy Chief for National Security Data Risks, Foreign Investment 
Review Section, National Security Division, U.S. Department of Justice, 
175 N Street NE, Washington, DC 20002; Telephone: 202-514-8648.

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:

Table of Contents

I. Executive Summary
II. Background
III. Rulemaking Process
IV. Discussion of Comments on the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking and 
Changes From the Proposed Rule
    A. General Comments
    1. Section 202.216--Effective Date.
    B. Subpart C--Prohibited Transactions and Related Activities
    1. Section 202.210--Covered Data Transactions
    2. Section 202.301--Prohibited Data-Brokerage Transactions; 
Section 202.214--Data Brokerage
    3. Section 202.201--Access
    4. Section 202.249--Sensitive Personal Data
    5. Section 202.212--Covered Personal Identifiers
    6. Section 202.234--Listed Identifier
    7. Section 202.242--Precise Geolocation Data
    8. Section 202.204--Biometric Identifiers
    9. Section 202.224--Human `Omic Data
    10. Section 202.240--Personal Financial Data
    11. Section 202.241--Personal Health Data
    12. Section 202.206--Bulk U.S. Sensitive Personal Data
    13. Section 202.205--Bulk
    14. Section 202.222--Government-Related Data
    15. Section 202.302--Other Prohibited Data-Brokerage 
Transactions Involving Potential Onward Transfer to Countries of 
Concern or Covered Persons
    16. Section 202.303--Prohibited Human `Omic Data and Human 
Biospecimen Transactions
    17. Section 202.304--Prohibited Evasions, Attempts, Causing 
Violations, and Conspiracies
    18. Section 202.215--Directing
    19. Section 202.230--Knowingly
    C. Subpart D--Restricted Transactions
    1. Section 202.401--Authorization To Conduct Restricted 
Transactions
    2. Section 202.258--Vendor Agreement
    3. Section 202.217--Employment Agreement
    4. Section 202.228--Investment Agreement
    D. Subpart E--Exempt Transactions
    1. Section 202.502--Information or Informational Materials
    2. Section 202.504--Official Business of the United States 
Government
    3. Section 202.505--Financial Services
    4. Section 202.506--Corporate Group Transactions
    5. Section 202.507--Transactions Required or Authorized by 
Federal Law or International Agreements, or Necessary for Compliance 
With Federal Law
    6. Section 202.509--Telecommunications Services
    7. Section 202.510--Drug, Biological Product, and Medical Device 
Authorizations
    8. Section 202.511--Other Clinical Investigations and Post-
Marketing Surveillance Data
    9. Exemptions for Non-Federally Funded Research
    E. Subpart F--Determination of Countries of Concern
    1. Section 202.601--Determination of Countries of Concern
    F. Subpart G--Covered Persons
    1. Section 202.211--Covered Person
    2. Section 202.701--Designation of Covered Persons
    G. Subpart H--Licensing
    H. Subpart I--Advisory Opinions
    1. Section 202.901--Inquiries Concerning Application of This 
Part
    I. Subpart J--Due Diligence and Audit Requirements
    1. Section 202.1001--Due Diligence for Restricted Transactions
    2. Section 202.1002--Audits for Restricted Transactions
    J. Subpart K--Reporting and Recordkeeping Requirements
    1. Section 202.1101--Records and Recordkeeping Requirements
    2. Section 202.1102--Reports To Be Furnished on Demand
    3. Section 202.1104--Reports on Rejected Prohibited Transactions
    K. Subpart M--Penalties and Finding of Violation
    L. Coordination With Other Regulatory Regimes
    M. Severability
    N. Other Comments
V. Regulatory Requirements
    A. Executive Orders 12866 (Regulatory Planning and Review) as 
Amended by Executive Orders 13563 (Improving Regulation and 
Regulatory Review) and 14094 (Modernizing Regulatory Review)
    B. Regulatory Flexibility Act
    1. Succinct Statement of the Objectives of, and Legal Basis for, 
the Rule
    2. Description of and, Where Feasible, an Estimate of the Number 
of Small Entities to Which the Rule Will Apply
    3. Description of the Projected Reporting, Recordkeeping, and 
Other Compliance Requirements of the Rule
    4. Identification of All Relevant Federal Rules That May 
Duplicate, Overlap, or Conflict With the Rule
    C. Executive Order 13132 (Federalism)
    D. Executive Order 13175 (Consultation and Coordination With 
Indian Tribal Governments)
    E. Executive Order 12988 (Civil Justice Reform)
    F. Paperwork Reduction Act
    G. Unfunded Mandates Reform Act
    H. Congressional Review Act
    I. Administrative Pay-As-You-Go Act of 2023

I. Executive Summary

    Executive Order 14117 of February 28, 2024, ``Preventing Access to 
Americans' Bulk Sensitive Personal Data and United States Government-
Related Data by Countries of Concern'' (``the Order''), directs the 
Attorney General to issue regulations that prohibit or otherwise 
restrict United States persons from engaging in any acquisition, 
holding, use, transfer, transportation, or exportation of, or dealing 
in, any property in which a foreign country or national thereof has any 
interest (``transaction''), where the transaction: involves United 
States Government-related data (``government-related data'') or bulk 
U.S. sensitive personal data, as defined by final rules implementing 
the Order; falls within a class of transactions that has been 
determined by the Attorney General to pose an unacceptable risk to the 
national security of the United States because it may enable access by 
countries of concern or covered persons to government-related data or 
Americans' bulk U.S. sensitive personal data; and meets other criteria 
specified by the Order.\1\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \1\ E.O. 14117, 89 FR 15421 (Feb. 28, 2024).

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 1637]]

    On March 5, 2024, the National Security Division of the Department 
of Justice (``DOJ'' or ``the Department'') issued an Advance Notice of 
Proposed Rulemaking (``ANPRM'') seeking public comment on various 
topics related to implementation of the Order.\2\ On October 29, 2024, 
the Department issued a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (``NPRM'') to 
address the public comments received on the ANPRM, set forth a proposed 
rule to implement the Order, and seek further public comment.\3\ The 
Department is now issuing a final rule that addresses the public 
comments received on the NPRM and that implements the Order. The rule 
identifies classes of prohibited and restricted transactions; 
identifies countries of concern and classes of covered persons with 
whom the regulations prohibit or restrict transactions involving 
government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data; 
establishes a process to issue (including to modify or rescind) 
licenses authorizing otherwise prohibited or restricted transactions 
and to issue advisory opinions; and addresses recordkeeping and 
reporting of transactions to inform investigative, enforcement, and 
regulatory efforts of the Department.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \2\ 89 FR 15780 (Mar. 5, 2024).
    \3\ 89 FR 86116 (Oct. 29, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

II. Background

    On February 28, 2024, the President issued Executive Order 14117 
(Preventing Access to Americans' Bulk Sensitive Personal Data and 
United States Government-Related Data by Countries of Concern) (``the 
Order''), pursuant to his authority under the Constitution and the laws 
of the United States, including the International Emergency Economic 
Powers Act, 50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq. (``IEEPA''); the National 
Emergencies Act, 50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq. (``NEA''); and title 3, section 
301 of the United States Code.\4\ In the Order, the President expanded 
the scope of the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13873 
of May 15, 2019 (Securing the Information and Communications Technology 
and Services Supply Chain), and further addressed with additional 
measures in Executive Order 14034 of June 9, 2021 (Protecting 
Americans' Sensitive Data From Foreign Adversaries). The President 
determined that additional measures are necessary to counter the 
unusual and extraordinary threat to U.S. national security posed by the 
continuing efforts of certain countries of concern to access and 
exploit government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \4\ 89 FR 15421.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The Order directs the Attorney General, pursuant to the President's 
delegation of his authorities under IEEPA, to issue regulations that 
prohibit or otherwise restrict United States persons from engaging in 
certain transactions in which a foreign country of concern or national 
thereof has an interest. Restricted and prohibited transactions include 
transactions that involve government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data, are a member of a class of transactions that 
the Attorney General has determined poses an unacceptable risk to the 
national security of the United States because the transactions may 
enable countries of concern or covered persons to access government-
related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data, and are not 
otherwise exempted from the Order or its implementing regulations. The 
Order directs the Attorney General to issue regulations that identify 
classes of prohibited and restricted transactions; identify countries 
of concern and classes of covered persons whose access to government-
related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data poses the national 
security risk described in the Order; establish a process to issue 
(including to modify or rescind) licenses authorizing otherwise 
prohibited or restricted transactions; further define terms used in the 
Order; address recordkeeping and reporting of transactions to inform 
investigative, enforcement, and regulatory efforts of the Department; 
and to take whatever additional actions, including promulgating 
additional regulations, as may be necessary to carry out the purposes 
of the Order.
    The rule implements the Order through categorical rules that 
regulate certain data transactions involving government-related data or 
bulk U.S. sensitive personal data that could give countries of concern 
or covered persons access to such data and present an unacceptable risk 
to U.S. national security. The rule (1) identifies certain classes of 
highly sensitive transactions with countries of concern or covered 
persons that the rule prohibits in their entirety (``prohibited 
transactions'') and (2) identifies other classes of transactions that 
would be prohibited except to the extent they comply with predefined 
security requirements (``restricted transactions'') to mitigate the 
risk of access to bulk U.S. sensitive personal data by countries of 
concern or covered persons. As the Department discussed in the NPRM, 
the Attorney General has determined that the prohibited and restricted 
transactions set forth in the rule pose an unacceptable risk to the 
national security of the United States because they may enable 
countries of concern or covered persons to access and exploit 
government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data.
    In addition to identifying classes of prohibited and restricted 
transactions that pose an unacceptable risk to national security, the 
rule identifies certain classes of transactions that are exempt from 
the rule. For example, the rule exempts transactions for the conduct of 
the official business of the United States Government by employees, 
grantees, or contractors thereof, and transactions conducted pursuant 
to a grant, contract, or other agreement entered into with the United 
States Government, including those for outbreak and pandemic 
prevention, preparedness, and response. The rule also defines relevant 
terms; identifies countries of concern; defines covered persons; and 
creates processes for the Department to issue general and specific 
licenses, to issue advisory opinions, and to designate entities or 
individuals as covered persons. The rule also establishes a compliance 
and enforcement regime.
    The Department relied upon unclassified and classified sources to 
support the rule. Although the unclassified record fully and 
independently supports the rule without the need to rely on the 
classified record, the classified record provides supplemental 
information that lends additional support to the rule. The rule would 
be the same even without the classified record.
    The Order and this rule fill an important gap in the United States 
Government's authorities to address the threat posed by countries of 
concern accessing government-related data or Americans' bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data. As the President determined in the Order, 
``[a]ccess to Americans' bulk sensitive personal data or United States 
Government-related data increases the ability of countries of concern 
to engage in a wide range of malicious activities.'' \5\ As the NPRM 
explained, countries of concern can use their access to government-
related data or Americans' bulk U.S. sensitive personal data to engage 
in malicious cyber-enabled activities and malign foreign influence 
activities and to track and build profiles on U.S. individuals, 
including members of the military and other Federal employees and 
contractors, for illicit purposes such as blackmail and espionage. And 
countries

[[Page 1638]]

of concern can exploit their access to government-related data or 
Americans' bulk U.S. sensitive personal data to collect information on 
activists, academics, journalists, dissidents, political figures, or 
members of nongovernmental organizations or marginalized communities to 
intimidate them; curb political opposition; limit freedoms of 
expression, peaceful assembly, or association; or enable other forms of 
suppression of civil liberties.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \5\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    As the 2024 National Counterintelligence Strategy explains, ``as 
part of a broader focus on data as a strategic resource, our 
adversaries are interested in personally identifiable information (PII) 
about U.S. citizens and others, such as biometric and genomic data, 
health care data, geolocation information, vehicle telemetry 
information, mobile device information, financial transaction data, and 
data on individuals' political affiliations and leanings, hobbies, and 
interests.'' \6\ These and other kinds of sensitive personal data ``can 
be especially valuable, providing adversaries not only economic and 
[research and development] benefits, but also useful 
[counterintelligence] information, as hostile intelligence services can 
use vulnerabilities gleaned from such data to target and blackmail 
individuals.'' \7\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \6\ Nat'l Counterintel. & Sec. Ctr., National 
Counterintelligence Strategy 2024, at 13 (Aug. 1, 2024), https://www.dni.gov/files/NCSC/documents/features/NCSC_CI_Strategy-pages-20240730.pdf [https://perma.cc/9L2T-VXSU].
    \7\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Nongovernmental experts have underscored these risks. For example, 
a recent study by the MITRE Corporation summarized open-source 
reporting, highlighting the threat of blackmail, coercion, 
identification of high-risk government personnel and sensitive 
locations, and improved targeting of offensive cyber operations and 
network exploitation posed by hostile actors' access to Americans' data 
derived from advertising technology.\8\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \8\ Kirsten Hazelrig, Ser. No. 14, Intelligence After Next: 
Surveillance Technologies Are Imbedded Into the Fabric of Modern 
Life--The Intelligence Community Must Respond, The MITRE Corporation 
2 (Jan. 5, 2023), https://www.mitre.org/sites/default/files/2023-01/PR-22-4107-INTELLIGENCE-AFTER-NEXT-14-January-2023.pdf [https://perma.cc/3WA2-PGM2].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The development of artificial intelligence (``AI''), high-
performance computing, big-data analytics, and other advanced 
technological capabilities by countries of concern amplifies the threat 
posed by these countries' access to government-related data or 
Americans' bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. For instance, the U.S. 
National Intelligence Council assessed in 2020 that ``access to 
personal data of other countries' citizens, along with AI-driven 
analytics, will enable [the People's Republic of China (``China'' or 
``PRC'')] to automate the identification of individuals and groups 
beyond China's borders to target with propaganda or censorship.'' \9\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \9\ Nat'l Intel. Council, Assessment: Cyber Operations Enabling 
Expansive Digital Authoritarianism 4 (Apr. 7, 2020), https://
www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/assessments/NICM-Declassified-
Cyber-Operations-Enabling-Expansive-Digital-Authoritarianism-
20200407_2022.pdf [https://perma.cc/ZKJ4-TBU6].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Countries of concern can also exploit their access to government-
related data regardless of volume to threaten U.S. national security. 
One academic study explained that ``[f]oreign and malign actors could 
use location datasets to stalk or track high-profile military or 
political targets,'' revealing ``sensitive locations--such as visits to 
a place of worship, a gambling venue, a health clinic, or a gay bar--
which again could be used for profiling, coercion, blackmail, or other 
purposes.'' \10\ The study further explained that location datasets 
could reveal ``U.S. military bases and undisclosed intelligence sites'' 
or ``be used to estimate military population or troop buildup in 
specific areas around the world or even identify areas of off-base 
congregation to target.'' \11\ As another example of these data risks 
and the relative ease with which they can be exploited, journalists 
were able to commercially acquire from a data broker a continuous 
stream of 3.6 billion geolocation data points that were lawfully 
collected on millions of people from advertising IDs.\12\ The 
journalists were then able to create ``movement profiles'' for tens of 
thousands of national security and military officials, and from there, 
could determine where they lived and worked as well as their names, 
education levels, family situations, and hobbies.\13\ The Order and 
this rule seek to mitigate these and other national security threats 
that arise from countries of concern accessing government-related data 
or Americans' bulk U.S. sensitive personal data.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \10\ Justin Sherman et al., Duke Sanford Sch. of Pub. Pol'y, 
Data Brokers and the Sale of Data on U.S. Military Personnel 15 
(Nov. 2023), https://techpolicy.sanford.duke.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/4/2023/11/Sherman-et-al-2023-Data-Brokers-and-the-Sale-of-Data-on-US-Military-Personnel.pdf [https://perma.cc/BBJ9-44UH].
    \11\ Id.
    \12\ Suzanne Smalley, US Company's Geolocation Data Transaction 
Draws Intense Scrutiny in Germany, The Record (July 18, 2024), 
https://therecord.media/germany-geolocation-us-data-broker [https://perma.cc/ME9F-TAQ7] (citing joint reporting by the German public 
broadcaster Bayerische Rundfunk and digital civil rights opinion 
news site netzpolitik.org).
    \13\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Additional open-source reporting released since issuance of the 
NPRM underscores the increasingly urgent risks posed by countries of 
concern obtaining access to government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data. For example, on November 22, 2024, 
cybersecurity researchers presented their findings after monitoring a 
collection of black-market services that recruit and pay insiders from 
a wide range of Chinese information technology (``IT''), technology, 
telecom, and other companies, to sell their access to individuals' data 
to online buyers. As a result, according to the researchers, these 
black-market services create an ecosystem for the public to pay to 
query individuals' data, including call records, bank accounts, hotel 
bookings, flight records, passport images, and location data.\14\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \14\ Andy Greenberg, China's Surveillance State Is Selling 
Citizen Data as a Side Hustle, WIRED (Nov. 21, 2024), https://www.wired.com/story/chineses-surveillance-state-is-selling-citizens-data-as-a-side-hustle/ [https://perma.cc/9B9P-3ZR6].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    On November 19, 2024, WIRED released the results of an 
investigation in which they bought the digital advertising data and 
location information on phones in Germany from a U.S. data broker and 
used it to track the movements of United States Government contractors, 
intelligence personnel, and soldiers.\15\ The investigation uncovered 
and tracked ``38,474 location signals from up to 189 devices inside 
B[uuml]chel Air Base, a high-security German installation where as many 
as 15 U.S. nuclear weapons are reportedly stored in underground 
bunkers''; 191,415 signals from up to 1,257 devices at Grafenw[ouml]hr 
Training Area, ``where thousands of U.S. troops are stationed and have 
trained Ukrainian soldiers on Abrams tanks''; and 164,223 signals from 
nearly 2,000 devices at Ramstein Air Base, ``which supports some U.S. 
drone operations.'' \16\ The researchers observed patterns that went 
``far beyond just understanding the working hours of people on base,'' 
including ``map[ping] key entry and exit points, pinpointing frequently 
visited areas, and even tracing personnel to their off-base routines.'' 
\17\ As WIRED explained, ``foreign governments could use this data to 
identify individuals with access to sensitive areas; terrorists or 
criminals

[[Page 1639]]

could decipher when U.S. nuclear weapons are least guarded; or spies 
and other nefarious actors could leverage embarrassing information for 
blackmail.'' \18\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \15\ Dhruv Mehrotra & Dell Cameron, Anyone Can Buy Data Tracking 
US Soldiers and Spies to Nuclear Vaults and Brothels in Germany, 
WIRED (Nov. 19, 2024), https://www.wired.com/story/phone-data-us-soldiers-spies-nuclear-germany/ [https://perma.cc/P5H6-3DFB].
    \16\ Id.
    \17\ Id.
    \18\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Similarly, on October 28, 2024, journalists found that ``the highly 
confidential movements of U.S. President Joe Biden, presidential rivals 
Donald Trump and Kamala Harris, and other world leaders can be easily 
tracked online through a fitness app that their bodyguards use,'' which 
tracked their precise location data even when they used the app while 
off-duty.\19\ This rule will prevent such foreign adversaries from 
legally obtaining such data through commercial transactions with U.S. 
persons, thereby stemming data flows and directly addressing the 
national security risks identified in the Order.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \19\ Sylvie Corbet, Fitness App Strava Gives Away Location of 
Biden, Trump and Other Leaders, French Newspaper Says, Associated 
Press (Oct. 28, 2024), https://apnews.com/article/biden-trump-macron-bodyguards-security-strava-0a48afca09c7aa74d703e72833dcaf72 
[https://perma.cc/W59P-Y6TY].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    No current Federal legislation or rule categorically prohibits or 
imposes security requirements to prevent U.S. persons from providing 
countries of concern or covered persons access to sensitive personal 
data or government-related data through data brokerage, vendor, 
employment, or investment agreements. For example, the scope and 
structure of the Protecting Americans' Data from Foreign Adversaries 
Act of 2024 (``PADFAA'') do not create a comprehensive regulatory 
scheme that adequately and categorically addresses these national 
security risks,\20\ as explained in part IV.L of this preamble. 
Likewise, the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States 
(``CFIUS'') has authority to assess the potential national security 
risks of certain investments by foreign persons in certain United 
States businesses that ``maintain[ ] or collect[ ] sensitive personal 
data of United States citizens that may be exploited in a manner that 
threatens national security.'' \21\ However, CFIUS only reviews certain 
types of investments in U.S. businesses; it does so on a transaction-
by-transaction basis, instead of prescribing prospective and 
categorical rules regulating all such transactions; and its authorities 
do not extend to other activities that countries of concern may use to 
gain access to government-related data or Americans' bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data, such as through purchases of such data on the 
commercial market or through vendor or employment agreements.\22\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \20\ See Public Law 118-50, div. I, 118th Cong. (2024).
    \21\ 50 U.S.C. 4565(a)(4)(B)(iii)(III).
    \22\ See generally Foreign Investment Risk Review Modernization 
Act of 2018, Public Law 115-232, tit. XVII, secs. 1701-28, 132 Stat. 
1636, 2173.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Similarly, Executive Order 13873 prohibits any acquisition, 
importation, transfer, installation, dealing in, or use by U.S. persons 
of certain information and communication technologies and services 
(``ICTS'') designed, developed, manufactured, or supplied by foreign 
adversaries where, among other things, the Secretary of Commerce 
determines that the transaction poses an ``unacceptable risk to the 
national security of the United States or the security and safety of 
United States persons.'' \23\ In building upon the national emergency 
declared in Executive Order 13873, the President, in Executive Order 
14034, determined that connected software applications operating on 
U.S. ICTS ``can access and capture vast swaths of . . . personal 
information and proprietary business information,'' a practice that 
``threatens to provide foreign adversaries with access to that 
information.'' \24\ However, as with CFIUS legal authorities, the 
orders do not broadly empower the United States Government to prohibit 
or otherwise restrict the sale of government-related data or Americans' 
bulk U.S. sensitive personal data, and the orders do not broadly 
restrict other commercial transactions, such as investment, employment, 
or vendor agreements, that may provide countries of concern access to 
government-related data or Americans' bulk U.S. sensitive personal 
data.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \23\ E.O. 13873, 84 FR 22689, 22690 (May 15, 2019).
    \24\ E.O. 14034, 86 FR 31423, 31423 (June 9, 2021).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The rule complements these statutory and regulatory authorities. It 
prescribes forward-looking, categorical rules that prevent U.S. persons 
from providing countries of concern or covered persons access to 
government-related data or Americans' bulk U.S. sensitive personal data 
through commercial data-brokerage transactions. The rule also imposes 
security requirements on other kinds of commercial transactions, such 
as investment, employment, and vendor agreements, that involve 
government-related data or Americans' bulk U.S. sensitive personal data 
to mitigate the risk that a country of concern could access such data. 
The rule addresses risks to government-related data or Americans' bulk 
U.S. sensitive personal data that current authorities leave vulnerable 
to access and exploitation by countries of concern and provide 
predictability and regulatory certainty by prescribing categorical 
rules regulating certain kinds of data transactions that could give 
countries of concern or covered persons access to government-related 
data or Americans' bulk U.S. sensitive personal data.

III. Rulemaking Process

    The Department has issued this rule via notice-and-comment 
rulemaking consistent with the President's direction in the Order, and 
it has provided the public with multiple and meaningful opportunities 
to share feedback on the rule at various stages of the rulemaking 
process.\25\ On March 5, 2024, the Department issued a fulsome ANPRM 
setting forth the contemplated contours of the rule, posed 114 specific 
questions for public input, and allotted 45 days for public 
comment.\26\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \25\ This rulemaking pertains to a foreign affairs function of 
the United States and therefore is not subject to the notice-and-
comment rulemaking requirements of the Administrative Procedure Act 
(``APA''), which exempts a rulemaking from such requirements ``to 
the extent there is involved . . . a military or foreign affairs 
function of the United States.'' 5 U.S.C. 553(a)(1). The rule is 
being issued to assist in addressing the national emergency declared 
by the President with respect to the threat posed to U.S. national 
security and foreign policy by the continuing effort of countries of 
concern to access and exploit government-related data or Americans' 
bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. As described in the Order, this 
threat to the national security and foreign policy of the United 
States has its source in whole or substantial part outside the 
United States. Accordingly, the rule has a direct impact on foreign 
affairs concerns, which include the protection of national security 
against external threats (for example, prohibiting or restricting 
transactions that pose an unacceptable risk of giving countries of 
concern or covered persons access to bulk U.S. sensitive personal 
data). Although the rule is not subject to the APA's notice and 
comment requirements, the Department is engaging in notice-and-
comment rulemaking for this rule, consistent with sections 2(a) and 
2(c) of the Order.
    \26\ 89 FR 15780.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    As described in the NPRM, the Department also solicited input on 
the ANPRM through dozens of large-group listening sessions, industry 
engagements, and one-on-one engagements with hundreds of 
participants.\27\ The Department of Justice, both on its own and with 
other agencies, met with businesses, trade groups, and other 
stakeholders potentially interested in or impacted by the contemplated 
regulations to discuss the ANPRM. For example, the Department discussed 
the ANPRM with the Consumer Technology Association, the Information 
Industry Technology Council, Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers 
of America, the Biotechnology Innovation Organization, the Bioeconomy 
Information Sharing Analysis Center, the U.S. Chamber of

[[Page 1640]]

Commerce, Tesla, Workday, Anthropic, and the Special Competitive 
Studies Project. It also provided briefings to the Secretary of 
Commerce and Industry Trade Advisory Committees 6, 10, and 12 
administered by the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative and the 
Department of Commerce. The Department of Justice also discussed the 
Order and contemplated regulations with stakeholders at events open to 
the public, including ones hosted by the American Conference Institute, 
the American Bar Association, the Center for Strategic and 
International Studies, and the R Street Institute, as well as through 
other public engagements such as the Lawfare Podcast, ChinaTalk 
Podcast, CyberLaw Podcast, and the Center for Cybersecurity Policy & 
Law's Distilling Cyber Policy podcast.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \27\ 89 FR 86119-56.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    During the ANPRM comment period, the Department received 64 timely 
comments, including 15 comments from trade associations; 13 from non-
profits; three from advocacy associations; three from technology 
companies; two from think tanks; and one each from an automobile 
manufacturer, advertising company, biotechnology company, and academic 
medical center. The Department also received two comments after the 
close of the ANPRM comment period. In turn, the NPRM included a lengthy 
and substantive consideration of these timely and untimely public 
comments received on the ANPRM.\28\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \28\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    After the comment period closed, the Department of Justice, along 
with the Department of Commerce, followed up with commenters who 
provided feedback regarding the bulk thresholds to discuss that topic 
in more detail. These commenters included the Council on Government 
Relations Industry Association; the Association of American Medical 
Colleges; Airlines for America; the Bank Policy Institute; the Business 
Roundtable; the Information Technology Industry Council; the Centre for 
Information Policy Leadership; the Biotechnology Innovation 
Organization; the Software and Information Industry Association; the 
Cellular Telephone Industries Association; the internet and Television 
Association; USTelecom; Ford Motor Company; the Bioeconomy Information 
Sharing and Analysis Center; the Coalition of Services Industries; the 
Enterprise Cloud Coalition; the Electronic Privacy Information Center; 
the Center for Democracy and Technology; the Business Software 
Alliance; the Global Data Alliance; the Interactive Advertising Bureau; 
the U.S.-China Business Council; IBM, Workday; and individuals Justin 
Sherman, Mark Febrizio, and Charlie Lorthioir. The Department also 
discussed the Order and the ANPRM with foreign partners to ensure that 
they understood the Order and contemplated program and how they fit 
into broader national security, economic, and trade policies.
    The Department published an NPRM on October 29, 2024, that 
addressed the public comments received on the ANPRM, set forth draft 
regulations and a lengthy explanatory discussion, and sought public 
comment.\29\ During the NPRM comment period, the Department, both on 
its own and with other agencies, met with businesses, trade groups, and 
other stakeholders potentially interested in or impacted by the 
contemplated regulations to discuss the NPRM. Also during the NPRM 
comment period, the Department, in coordination with the Department of 
Commerce, conducted individual consultations with the Pharmaceutical 
Research and Manufacturers of America, the Centre for Information 
Policy Leadership, the Electronic Privacy Information Center, the 
Information Technology Industry Council, the World Privacy Forum, the 
U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the Council on Government Relations, BSA The 
Software Alliance, and the Telecommunications Industry Association to 
discuss their members' views. In accordance with 28 CFR 50.17, the 
Department has documented all ex parte engagements during the NPRM's 
comment period and publicly posted summaries of them on the docket for 
this rulemaking on regulations.gov. The Department encouraged those 
groups to submit detailed, timely comments to follow up on those 
discussions. The Department also discussed the NPRM with stakeholders 
at events open to the public, including ones hosted by the American 
Conference Institute, and through other public engagements such as the 
Lawfare Podcast, ChinaTalk Podcast, and the Center for Cybersecurity 
Policy & Law's Distilling Cyber Policy podcast. The Department also 
discussed the NPRM with foreign partners to ensure that they understood 
the contemplated program and how it fits into broader national 
security, economic, and trade policies.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \29\ 89 FR 86116.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Although the NPRM evolved from the ANPRM based on the Department's 
consideration of public comments, such as by adding new potential 
exemptions to the proposed rule's prohibitions and restrictions, the 
NPRM included most of the substantive provisions that the Department 
either previewed or described in detail in the ANPRM. For example, in 
many instances, the NPRM adopted without change definitions the 
Department also set forth in the ANPRM.\30\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \30\ See, e.g., 89 FR 86123.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The Department received and carefully reviewed 75 timely comments 
in response to the NPRM from trade associations, public interest 
advocacy groups, think tanks, private individuals, and companies, as 
well as comments from several foreign governments. The Department also 
reviewed three comments that were relevant to the NPRM and that were 
timely filed on the docket in response to the Cybersecurity and 
Infrastructure Security Agency (``CISA'') Federal Register notice 
requesting comment on proposed security requirements applicable to 
restricted transactions.\31\ The Department considered each comment 
that was timely submitted.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \31\ 89 FR 85976 (Oct. 29, 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    During the 31-day comment period, the Department received a request 
to extend the time allotted for public comment.\32\ As described in the 
NPRM, the Department solicited input on the ANPRM through engagements 
with dozens of stakeholders, including many of the commenters who 
sought the extension to the NPRM comment period.\33\ As described in 
detail in part III of this preamble, during the NPRM comment period, 
the Department also conducted numerous engagements with the public to 
facilitate meaningful public participation during the comment period by 
providing stakeholders with an opportunity to ask questions about the 
proposed rule and to provide relevant feedback. These engagements 
included the organizations that requested that the Department extend 
the comment period.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \32\ Consumer Tech. Ass'n, et al., Comment Letter on Provisions 
Pertaining to Preventing Access to U.S. Sensitive Personal Data and 
Gov't-Related Data by Countries of Concern or Covered Persons (Nov. 
8, 2024), https://www.regulations.gov/comment/DOJ-NSD-2024-0004-0008 
[https://perma.cc/3URP-9H7B]. Although the official comment period 
was 30 days from the NPRM's publication in the Federal Register on 
October 29, 2024, the Department shared the NPRM on its website on 
October 21, 2024, providing the public with a total of 41 days to 
review and provide comment. See Press Release, U.S. Dep't of Just., 
Justice Department Issues Comprehensive Proposed Rule Addressing 
National Security Risks Posed to U.S. Sensitive Data (Oct. 21, 
2024), https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justice-department-issues-comprehensive-proposed-rule-addressing-national-security-risks 
[https://perma.cc/ZS7G-9QZH].
    \33\ 89 FR 86119-56.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The Department considered this request but declined to extend the 
comment period for several reasons.\34\

[[Page 1641]]

As the Order, ANPRM, NPRM, and part IV of this preamble describe, the 
Department is issuing this rule to address the national emergency posed 
by an unusual and extraordinary threat from the continued effort of 
countries of concern to access government-related data and bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data. This is an increasingly urgent threat, and the 
Department must move expeditiously to address it. Foreign adversaries 
are actively trying to exploit commercial access to Americans' 
sensitive personal data to threaten U.S. national security. This rule 
thus fills what Members of Congress and Administrations of both parties 
have consistently recognized is a significant gap in U.S. national 
security.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \34\ U.S. Dep't of Just., Comment Letter on Provisions 
Pertaining to Preventing Access to U.S. Sensitive Personal Data and 
Gov't-Related Data by Countries of Concern or Covered Persons (Nov. 
18, 2024), https://www.regulations.gov/document/DOJ-NSD-2024-0004-0028 [https://perma.cc/M86F-5NUG].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    For example, the 2017 National Security Strategy noted that China 
and other adversaries ``weaponize information'' against the United 
States and predicted that ``[r]isks to U.S. national security will grow 
as competitors integrate information derived from personal and 
commercial sources with intelligence collection and data analytic 
capabilities based on Artificial Intelligence (AI) and machine 
learning.'' \35\ That strategy criticized ``U.S. efforts to counter the 
exploitation of information'' by adversaries as ``tepid and 
fragmented,'' having ``lacked a sustained focus.'' \36\ A partially 
declassified April 2020 assessment by the Office of the Director of 
National Intelligence (``ODNI'') explained that foreign adversaries are 
``increasing their ability to analyze and manipulate large quantities 
of personal information in ways that will allow them to more 
effectively target and influence, or coerce, individuals and groups in 
the United States and allied countries.'' \37\ The 2022 National 
Security Strategy underscored the need to develop a way to ``counter 
the exploitation of Americans' sensitive data.'' \38\ A bipartisan 2023 
report by the House Select Committee on the Strategic Competition 
Between the United States and the Chinese Communist Party (``CCP'') 
explained that the ``CCP is committed to using the presence of 
technology products and services it controls to conduct cyberattacks on 
the United States,'' ``collect data on Americans to advance its AI 
goals,'' and ``surveil Americans as part of its campaign of 
transnational repression.'' \39\ The Committee's bipartisan 
recommendations included taking ``steps to prevent foreign adversaries 
from collecting or acquiring U.S. genomic and other sensitive health 
data.'' \40\ The 2024 National Counterintelligence Strategy made 
protecting Americans against foreign intelligence targeting and 
collection a key goal given foreign adversaries' ``broader focus on 
data as a strategic resource'' and the counterintelligence value it 
provides.\41\ The November 2024 Report to Congress of the U.S.-China 
Economic & Security Review Commission explained that ``China 
understands the value of data to AI and has taken active measures to 
increase the availability of quality data within its AI ecosystem.'' 
\42\ The report also explains that the ``major research and market 
presence of Chinese genomic and biotech services companies in the 
United States gives these companies access to key technologies and 
data,'' leading to a ``heightened risk of the transfer of sensitive 
health data of U.S. citizens'' to China.\43\ And so on.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \35\ Exec. Off. Of the President, National Security. Strategy of 
the United States of America 34 (Dec. 2017), https://trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/NSS-Final-12-18-2017-0905.pdf [https://perma.cc/R4F5-QXJH].
    \36\ Id. at 35.
    \37\ Nat'l Intel. Council, supra note 9, at 3.
    \38\ Exec. Off. of the President, National Security Strategy 33 
(Oct. 12, 2022), https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/Biden-Harris-Administrations-National-Security-Strategy-10.2022.pdf [https://perma.cc/G54X-L7ER].
    \39\ H. Select Comm. on the Strategic Competition Between the 
U.S. and the Chinese Communist Party, Reset, Prevent, Build: A 
Strategy to Win America's Economic Competition with the Chinese 
Communist Party 22 (2023), https://selectcommitteeontheccp.house.gov/sites/evo-subsites/selectcommitteeontheccp.house.gov/files/evo-media-document/reset-prevent-build-scc-report.pdf [https://perma.cc/5A7Q-YL9U].
    \40\ Id. at 23.
    \41\ Nat'l Counterintel. & Sec. Ctr., supra note 6, at 13.
    \42\ U.S.-China Econ. & Sec. Review Comm'n, 118th Cong., 2024 
Rep. to Cong. 11 (Comm. Print 2024), https://www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/2024-11/2024_Annual_Report_to_Congress.pdf [https://perma.cc/ZWC5-G5SV].
    \43\ Id. at 12, 220.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Extending the comment period would allow this increasingly urgent, 
unaddressed threat to continue unabated, giving countries of concern 
more time and opportunities to collect and exploit government-related 
data and bulk U.S. sensitive personal data.\44\ Delay only increases 
this unusual and extraordinary threat which gives countries of concern 
``a cheap and reliable way to [among other threatening activities] 
track the movements of American military and intelligence personnel 
overseas, from their homes and their children's schools to hardened 
aircraft shelters within an airbase where . . . nuclear weapons are 
believed to be stored.'' \45\ Not only do countries of concern like 
China ``draw on . . . commercially collected data sources . . . [and] 
insiders from the country's tech and telecom firms [and] banks'' to 
perpetuate its surveillance apparatus, they also sell their access to 
such data for other nefarious purposes that can put Americans at 
risk.\46\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \44\ See, e.g., Mehrotra & Cameron, supra note 15 (describing an 
``analysis of billions of location coordinates obtained from a US-
based data broker [that] provides extraordinary insight into the 
daily routines of US service members'' and ``[provides]'' ``a vivid 
example of the significant risks the unregulated sale of mobile 
location data poses to the integrity of the US military and the 
safety of its service members and their families overseas'').
    \45\ Id.
    \46\ See Greenberg, supra note 14 (describing how a surveillance 
data black market has developed in China due in part to there being 
``virtually no legal checks on the government's ability to 
physically and digitally monitor its citizens'' and in which ``phone 
numbers, hotel and flights records, and . . . location data [are 
sold]'' in criminal markets).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The Department also believes that extending the comment period 
would not provide meaningful additional input that would improve the 
rule. The Department has gone to great lengths to provide the public 
with meaningful opportunities to provide input at every stage of 
development of this rule. The Department took the optional step of 
releasing an ANPRM to provide the public with an additional formal 
opportunity to comment, in addition to the public's formal opportunity 
to comment on the NPRM. The rule closely tracks the NPRM, which had all 
its core components extensively previewed in the ANPRM. The public has 
had at least 87 days to formally provide comments throughout this 
rulemaking: The comment period on the NPRM was 31 days, the public had 
an additional 11 days to review the NPRM while it was on public 
inspection in the Federal Register before it was formally published, 
and the public had 45 days to comment on the ANPRM.
    In addition to these formal opportunities to comment, and as 
documented in the ANPRM, NPRM, part III of this preamble, and the 
docket on regulations.gov, the Department also provided extensive 
informal opportunities for feedback. Those opportunities began with 
multiple informal engagements with hundreds of stakeholders before the 
release of the Order and ANPRM. After the release of the ANPRM and 
NPRM, the Department undertook extensive large-group, small-group, and 
one-on-one engagements with over 800 stakeholder invitees or 
participants across over 50 informal engagements to explain the rule 
and provide feedback.

[[Page 1642]]

    As described in part IV of this preamble, many of the comments 
received on the NPRM merely state preferences or renew comments made on 
the ANPRM without providing specific information or new analysis, or do 
not engage with the analysis in the NPRM. The constructive refinements 
suggested by commenters have become increasingly discrete. In addition, 
many commenters have not specifically identified what additional 
changes, analysis, or data they would provide if given additional time 
to comment. The Department thus believes that the opportunities for 
public comment and input during this rulemaking process have 
appropriately balanced the need for feedback to ensure that the rule 
effectively addresses the national security risks and the need to move 
expeditiously given the increasingly urgent national security risks.

IV. Discussion of Comments on the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking and 
Changes From the Proposed Rule

    The discussion in part IV of this preamble summarizes comments 
submitted in response to the NPRM and responds to those comments. The 
Department does not discuss provisions of the rule that commenters did 
not address substantively and has implemented those provisions in the 
final rule without change from the NPRM. Unless the Department 
otherwise addresses parts of the rule in this preamble, the Department 
incorporates the NPRM's discussion of the rule into the preamble,\47\ 
including, for example, the Department's determination that the 
categories of covered data transactions pose an unacceptable risk to 
national security,\48\ the Department's interpretation of ``information 
or informational materials'' under IEEPA,\49\ and the Department's 
analysis for proposed bulk thresholds.\50\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \47\ 89 FR 86117-70.
    \48\ 89 FR 86121.
    \49\ 89 FR 86165-70.
    \50\ 89 FR 86156-65.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Many comments were constructive. They expressed strong support for 
the goals of the Order and the rule, the use of exemptions as a careful 
and targeted approach to addressing the national security and foreign 
policy risks, and the Department's changes in the NPRM in response to 
comments on the ANPRM. These comments suggested and justified 
additional specific refinements that help clarify and reinforce the 
targeted nature of the Order and the rule, which are addressed with 
respect to the relevant subparts of the rule.
    Some commenters suggested clarifications or changes that were 
premised on a misunderstanding or narrow view of the Order and this 
rule. For example, some comments were premised on the view that the 
national security and foreign policy risks addressed by the Order and 
this rule are solely or primarily about the identifiability of a set of 
sensitive personal data. As the NPRM explained, anonymized data is 
rarely, if ever, truly anonymous, especially when anonymized data in 
one dataset can become identifiable when cross-referenced and layered 
on top of another anonymized dataset.\51\ In addition, as the 
Department discussed in detail in the NPRM, identifiability is only one 
in a range of concerns. Anonymized data itself can present a national 
security risk, as can pattern-of-life data and other insights that harm 
national security from anonymized data itself (such as in the case of 
precise geolocation data).\52\ Sets of bulk U.S. sensitive personal 
data may also be used to identify vulnerabilities within a population 
or, in the case of bulk human genomic data, to enhance military 
capabilities that include facilitating the development of bioweapons. 
Additionally, even smaller sets of bulk U.S. sensitive personal data 
can be used to make statistical inferences or conclusions about much 
larger population sets. Usually, a sample size should not and need not 
exceed 10 percent of a population to make inferences about the entire 
population. However, even extremely small sample sizes may allow the 
extrapolation of inferences about much larger populations. For example, 
Meta requires only a source audience of 1,000 customers, which need 
only include 100 people from a single country, in order to extrapolate 
a ``lookalike'' audience of million individuals for targeted 
advertising. In other words, countries of concern may be able to glean 
valuable information about the health and financial well-being of a 
large number of Americans through smaller datasets of bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data. As a result, the Department has not adopted 
these suggestions, as they do not account for the broader range of 
national security risks that the Order and this rule address.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \51\ 89 FR 86126-27.
    \52\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Similarly, some comments were premised on a narrow view that the 
sole or primary focus of the rule is the sale of data. As discussed at 
length in the Order, ANPRM, and NPRM and as further described in part 
IV.C of this preamble, the sale of data is only one means by which 
countries of concerns are seeking access to government-related data and 
bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. Countries of concern also leverage 
vendor, employment, and investment agreements as additional vectors to 
try to obtain that access. As a result, the Department has not adopted 
suggestions to the extent that they do not account for the full range 
of risk vectors that the Order and this rule addresses.
    Many comments failed to provide specifics the Department would need 
to justify changes to the rule. These comments merely stated policy 
preferences or made conclusory assertions without providing meaningful 
support or analysis, or without addressing the analysis in the ANPRM 
and NPRM. For example, some comments claimed that the rule would have 
particular impacts on certain sectors or activities, but they did not 
identify specific non-exempt covered data transactions with countries 
of concern or covered persons that currently occur that the rule would 
prohibit or restrict, explain the significance of these transactions to 
the sector or industry, show why the sensitive personal data in those 
transactions was integral to share with a country of concern or covered 
person, or explain why it would not be feasible to shift those 
transactions to other countries or persons over time.
    Other comments reflected misunderstandings about the Order and the 
proposed rule. For example, several comments stated that, with respect 
to different provisions of the proposed rule that apply to a category 
of activity ``including'' a list of specifics, it is unclear whether 
those lists are exhaustive or exemplary. There is no ambiguity, 
however, because Sec.  202.102(b) already defines ``including'' to mean 
``including but not limited to.'' The final rule addresses other 
mistaken assertions and misunderstandings with respect to each subpart 
in part IV of this preamble and clarifies what the rule does or does 
not do.
    One commenter reiterated comments originally provided on the ANPRM 
to suggest that the Order's and the proposed rule's restrictions on 
access to sensitive personal data are inconsistent with international 
commitments by the United States. Specifically, the commenter calls on 
the Department to make a greater effort to explain how the rule is 
consistent with the U.S. commitment towards the promotion of trusted 
cross-border data flows. As the NPRM explained, the rule permits cross-
border data flows except with respect to

[[Page 1643]]

commercial transactions that pose unacceptable national security risks 
(and thus lack the trust required for the free flow of data), which the 
rule prohibits or restricts.\53\ Because the commenter merely renews 
its prior comment on the ANPRM without any attempt to address the 
explanation in the NPRM, no further explanation appears necessary.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \53\ 89 FR 86121.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The Department will continue to assess the risk posed by countries 
of concern and covered persons accessing government-related data or 
bulk U.S. sensitive personal data, including examining whether the 
Department needs to expand the final rule to tackle connected data 
security concerns, such as data scraping or illegitimate data access 
via the provision of services from entities linked to state threat 
actors. The Department retains the right to promulgate additional rules 
within the scope of the Order to address that risk.
    Two commenters reiterated suggestions that the Department make 
various revisions to borrow or incorporate aspects of international or 
State privacy laws into this rule. As previously stated in the NPRM, 
the Department supports privacy measures and national security measures 
as complementary protections for Americans' sensitive personal 
data.\54\ Despite some overlap, privacy protections and national 
security measures generally focus on different challenges associated 
with sensitive personal data. General privacy protections focus on 
addressing individual rights and preventing individual harm, such as 
protecting the rights of individuals to control the use of their own 
data and reducing the potential harm to individuals by minimizing the 
collection of data on the front end and limiting the permissible uses 
of that data on the back end. National security measures, by contrast, 
focus on collective risks and externalities that may result from how 
individuals and businesses choose to sell and use their data, including 
in lawful and legitimate ways. Commenters' suggestions raise no new 
justifications that the Department did not already consider at the NPRM 
stage, nor do these suggestions address how or why privacy protections 
would adequately address national security concerns such that the 
Department should align definition with existing privacy laws.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \54\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    In response to the NPRM, some commenters suggested adding a new 
exemption for transactions in which a U.S. individual consents to the 
sale or disclosure of their data to a country of concern or covered 
person. One commenter requested that the Department exempt disclosures 
of nonclinical research data where research subjects consented to the 
disclosure of their data. Another commenter expressed concern about 
their data being sold within the United States for commercial purposes 
without consent or equitable benefit.
    The rule declines to adopt a consent exemption for the same reasons 
provided in the NPRM. As explained in the NPRM, such a consent-based 
exemption would leave unaddressed the threat to national security by 
allowing U.S. individuals and companies to choose to share government-
related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data with countries of 
concern or covered persons.\55\ It is precisely those choices that, in 
aggregate, have helped create the national security risk of access by 
countries of concern or covered persons, and the purpose of the Order 
and the rule is to address the negative externality that has been 
created by individuals' and companies' choices in the market in the 
first place. It would also be inconsistent with other national security 
regulations to leave it up to market choices to decide whether to give 
American technology, capital, or data to a country of concern or 
covered person. Export controls do not allow U.S. companies to 
determine whether their sensitive technology can be sent to a foreign 
adversary, and sanctions do not allow U.S. persons to determine whether 
their capital and material support can be given to terrorists and other 
malicious actors. Likewise, the rule does not allow U.S. individuals to 
determine whether to give countries of concern or covered persons 
access to their sensitive personal data or government-related data. One 
of the reasons that the public is not in a position to assess and make 
decisions about the national security interests of the United States is 
that the public typically does not have all of the information 
available to make a fully informed decision about the national security 
interests of the United States.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \55\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The Department also declines to adopt a residual compensation 
requirement for domestic sales of data. The Order and this rule do not 
address purely domestic transactions between U.S. persons--such as the 
collection, maintenance, processing, or use of data by U.S. persons 
within the United States--except to the extent that such U.S. persons 
are affirmatively and publicly designated as covered persons.
    Each subpart of the rule, including any relevant comments received 
on the corresponding part of the NPRM, is discussed below in the 
remaining sections of this preamble.

A. General Comments

1. Section 202.216--Effective Date
    The NPRM did not propose a specific effective date of the 
applicable prohibitions and directives contained in the proposed rule. 
One commenter requested consultation with the Department on a timeframe 
for the implementation of the final rule. Some commenters requested 
that the Department delay the effective date of the rule--with requests 
ranging from 12 months to 18 months, or an indefinite deadline--to 
allow companies, individuals, and universities time to assess their 
data transactions, update internal polices, make necessary data 
security changes, and come into compliance without disrupting 
commercial activity. Two commenters suggested that the Department 
``pause'' rulemaking, postpone publication of the final rule, or, 
alternatively, publish the regulations for prohibited transactions 
first and postpone the publication of restricted transactions to a 
later, indeterminate date to provide more time for consultation and 
revisions to those provisions.
    The Department carefully considered these requests and declines, at 
least at this time, to categorically extend the effective date beyond 
April 8, 2025. The Department will, however, delay the date for when 
U.S. persons must comply with subpart J, related to due diligence and 
audit requirements for restricted transactions, and for Sec. Sec.  
202.1103 and 202.1104, related to certain reporting requirements for 
restricted transactions, until October 6, 2025.
    For reasons similar to the reasons why the Department declined to 
extend the comment period, the Department declines these commenters' 
request to significantly delay the effective date across the board. As 
the Order, ANPRM, NPRM, and parts III and IV of this preamble explain, 
this rule addresses a national emergency and an unusual and 
extraordinary threat to national security and foreign policy. Foreign 
adversaries are actively trying to exploit commercial access to 
Americans' sensitive personal data to threaten U.S. national security. 
This threat is increasingly urgent, justifying the expedited process 
for this rulemaking to address that threat. Significantly delaying the 
effective date of the final rule across the board would

[[Page 1644]]

give countries of concern additional time to collect government-related 
data and bulk U.S. sensitive personal data.\56\ The pressing risks 
posed by these countries' ongoing attempts to collect and exploit 
government-related data and bulk U.S. sensitive personal data to the 
detriment of U.S. national security weigh against extending the 
effective date of the rule, notwithstanding the compliance burdens some 
commenters raised. Commenters' request for a significantly delayed 
effective date cannot be reconciled with the need to expeditiously 
address these increasingly urgent and serious risks. United States 
persons have been on notice regarding the risks of sharing sensitive 
personal data with countries of concern for years and the United States 
Government's recommended steps to address those risks. For example, 
since at least 2020, the Department of Homeland Security (``DHS'') has 
publicly warned U.S. businesses using data services from the PRC or 
sharing data with the PRC about the same risk vectors addressed by this 
rule.\57\ DHS Security has urged U.S. entities to ``scrutinize any 
business relationship that provides access to data'' by ``identifying 
the sensitive personal and proprietary information in their 
possession,'' ``minimiz[ing] the amount of at-risk data being stored 
and used in the PRC or in places accessible by PRC authorities,'' and 
conducting ``[r]obust due diligence and transaction monitoring'' that 
includes ``acquir[ing] a thorough understanding of the ownership of 
data service providers, location of data infrastructure, and any 
tangential foreign business relationships and significant foreign 
investors.'' \58\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \56\ See, e.g., Mehrotra & Cameron, supra note 15 (describing an 
``analysis of billions of location coordinates obtained from a US-
based data broker [that] provides extraordinary insight into the 
daily routines of US service members'' and provides ``a vivid 
example of the significant risks the unregulated sale of mobile 
location data poses to the integrity of the US military and the 
safety of its service members and their families overseas'').
    \57\ U.S. Dep't of Homeland Sec., Data Security Business 
Advisory: Risks and Considerations for Businesses Using Data 
Services and Equipment from Firms Linked to China, https://www.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/publications/20_1222_data-security-business-advisory.pdf [https://perma.cc/2C5B-CEWC].
    \58\ Id. at 13.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    United States persons have been aware of this contemplated 
rulemaking since the issuance of the Order and ANRPM in February 2024. 
During engagements with companies and industry, some participants 
suggested that their efforts to understand and map their covered data 
transactions are already underway, and some other multinational 
companies explained that they already operate separate systems that 
``firewall'' U.S.-person data from access in China and other countries 
of concern and impose access controls to prevent unauthorized foreign 
access. Similarly, in the comments on the NPRM, a different large 
global technology business stated that multinational companies already 
have robust data privacy and export control programs that may be 
leveraged to comply with the rule, and that companies should not be 
required to set up entirely new compliance programs; another commenter 
echoed the view that companies should be able to leverage existing 
privacy and data security programs. But given the serious national 
security concerns, if the rule becomes effective, for example, before a 
U.S. person engaging in restricted transactions is able to comply with 
the security and other requirements the U.S. person should not engage 
in those transactions.
    The comments seeking to significantly delay or pause the effective 
date did not offer adequate substantive analysis or support necessary 
to justify the change. These comments expressed a general preference 
for delay, but they did not attempt to, for example, identify what and 
how many specific non-exempt transactions they engage in that would be 
prohibited or restricted; identify what specific controls, 
recordkeeping, or systems they currently have in place and why those 
are not sufficient to comply; identify what controls, recordkeeping, or 
systems they do not have in place now that they would be required to 
adopt to comply with the rule; or explain why those transactions could 
not be paused, terminated, or shifted to non-countries of concern or 
non-covered persons before the effective date or the specific impact of 
doing so. The Department thus does not believe that these comments 
provide an adequate basis on which to justify a significantly delayed 
effective for the sectors and industries represented by the commenters, 
in light of the pressing national security risks described in the 
Order, ANPRM, NPRM, and this preamble.
    In addition, the commenters requesting a significantly delayed 
effective date represent specific sectors and industries. The specific 
industries represented by these commenters appear to have different 
views about the time and resources needed for implementation and do not 
appear to be sufficiently representative of the entire category of U.S. 
persons engaging in data transactions that may be prohibited or 
restricted under the rule. The Department thus does not believe that 
these comments justify an across-the-board delay of the effective date.
    As a result, in light of the need to expeditiously address the 
increasingly urgent national security threat and the lack of 
significant and specific countervailing evidence, the Department 
believes that it is appropriate for the final rule to establish an 
effective date of 90 days as a starting point, consistent with 5 U.S.C. 
801(a)(3) and 5 U.S.C. 553(d).\59\ At one end of the spectrum, an 
earlier effective date may mean more U.S. persons are not prepared to 
comply with the rule and who must delay (or forgo, in some cases) 
transactions that may implicate the rule or forgo a broader suite of 
business opportunities that would not be prohibited or restricted under 
the rule, resulting in temporary but additional costs while they 
prepare to comply. At the other end of the spectrum, a later effective 
date would mean a greater risk to national security and foreign policy 
while countries of concern and covered person have additional time to 
access, obtain, and exploit government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data. The Department believes it is appropriate to 
err on the side of the former given the serious and pressing risks.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \59\ These provisions--in particular 5 U.S.C. 801(a)(3)--
generally require the effective date be at least 60 days after 
publication of the rule in the Federal Register. The Department has 
not invoked any exception to these statutory requirements, 
notwithstanding the national emergency and threat to national 
security and foreign policy addressed by this rule. Although the 
risks addressed by this rule are urgent and ongoing, the Department 
recognizes the breadth of potential disruption to current business 
activities and the associated economic interest in a more orderly 
process for coming into compliance with this rule. The Department is 
exercising its discretion in balancing the ongoing threats to 
national security with the potential disruption to current business 
activities and has therefore determined that while a blanket 
extension beyond 90 days is unwarranted, it also would not be 
appropriate to establish an effective date earlier than that.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The Department recognizes that U.S. persons may need time to amend 
internal policies and procedures to ensure compliance with the final 
rule's due diligence provisions and to comply with reporting 
requirements by, for example, evaluating and assessing ongoing 
transactions or transaction types. Some aspects of the rule can be 
delayed without unduly compromising the national security interests 
advanced by the principal prohibitions and restrictions in subparts C 
and D. The rule's due-diligence requirements for engaging in restricted 
transactions and the recordkeeping requirements that apply to both 
prohibited and restricted transactions are based on existing compliance 
expectations set by other

[[Page 1645]]

regulators, such as the Department of Treasury's Office of Foreign 
Asset Control (``OFAC'') and the Department of Commerce's Bureau of 
Industry and Security (``BIS''), for screening vendors and transaction 
counterparties. The Department recognizes, however, the specific burden 
in applying these provisions to this new context, and has determined it 
is appropriate to allow additional time--an additional six months--
before those provisions become operative. Thus, the provisions in 
Sec. Sec.  202.1001, 202.1002, 202.1103, and 202.1104 will only apply 
to those who engage in the relevant transactions (or, for Sec.  
202.1104, reject a proposed transaction) on or after October 6, 2025. 
The Department believes that this will allow sufficient time for the 
vast majority of entities to come into compliance with these provisions 
and appropriately balances the value of these provisions to combatting 
the national security threat they are intended to address. This delay 
will have the effect of phasing in these additional compliance 
requirements, allowing U.S. persons to focus their efforts at the start 
on identifying and understanding the data transactions they engage in 
and complying with the prohibitions and restrictions.
    During the 90-day period before the rule's effective date and the 
additional period before the remaining provisions become operative, the 
Department will continue to robustly engage with stakeholders to 
determine whether additional time for implementation is necessary and 
appropriate. Through those engagements and with more specific 
information, the Department may determine, for example, that it is 
appropriate (1) for the 90-day effective date to remain in effect, but 
to issue a general license authorizing companies to take additional 
time to wind-down activities regulated by the rule if they cannot come 
into compliance before that date; (2) for the 90-day effective date to 
remain in effect, but to issue a general license establishing delayed 
effective dates for specific sectors or activities; (3) for the 90-day 
effective date to remain in effect, but to issue a general license 
further delaying the effective date as to certain compliance 
requirements or adjusting those requirements; (4) for the 90-day 
effective date to remain in effect, but to issue a non-enforcement 
policy for a certain period; (5) to delay the effective date, either 
through regulatory modification or a general license; or (6) to make no 
changes. The Department will also consider other courses of action as 
circumstances warrant.
    Several commenters requested that the Department incorporate a 
mechanism for continued engagement with the public to discuss and 
assess the rule's effectiveness in light of, and its application to, 
evolving technologies and threats and to provide compliance guidance. 
After the Department issues the final rule, the Department plans to 
continue its robust stakeholder engagement, as it has done throughout 
the rulemaking process, and issue guidance on compliance and other 
topics. In addition, through the advisory opinion process, the rule 
provides a formal avenue for the public to request and receive 
clarifications about the rule's applicability to particular 
transactions. Finally, section 5 of the Order already establishes a 
formal mechanism for the Department to assess the effectiveness and 
economic impact of the rule by requiring a report within one year after 
the rule goes into effect, which will include the solicitation and 
consideration of public comments.\60\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \60\ 89 FR 15427.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    A few commenters requested clarification from the Department on 
whether the provisions of the rule will apply retroactively and to 
existing contracts, or if the provisions will only apply prospectively 
on new contracts or contracts up for renewal. One commenter requested 
that if the Department determines that retroactive application is 
required for the provision in Sec.  202.302 requiring certain 
contractual provisions for data brokerage transactions with foreign 
persons, then the Department allow sufficient time to amend existing 
agreements to ensure compliance.
    The rule applies to covered data transactions engaged on or after 
the effective date. Covered data transactions completed prior to the 
effective date are not regulated by the rule. However, unless exempt or 
otherwise authorized, U.S. persons knowingly engaging in a prohibited 
or restricted covered data transaction on or after the effective date 
are expected to comply with the rule, notwithstanding any contract 
entered into or any license or permit granted before the effective 
date. In the case of Sec.  202.302, for instance, this means that any 
relevant covered data transactions engaged in on or after the effective 
date must comply with the contractual requirements in Sec.  
202.302(a)(1), even where the U.S. persons had an existing agreement 
with the foreign person prior to the effective date. Restricted and 
prohibited transactions will not be grandfathered in as compliant 
simply because any resulting covered data transactions are subject to a 
preexisting contract or agreement. The significant national security 
concerns outlined in the Order, NPRM, and parts II-IV of this preamble 
require these regulations to be implemented as quickly as possible. 
Entities that believe they need more time to come into compliance with 
these regulations may request a specific license.

B. Subpart C--Prohibited Transactions and Related Activities

    The proposed rule identified transactions that are categorically 
prohibited unless the proposed rule otherwise authorizes them pursuant 
to an exemption or a general or specific license or, for the categories 
of restricted transactions, in compliance with security requirements 
and other requirements set forth in the proposed rule.
1. Section 202.210--Covered Data Transactions
    The Order authorizes the Attorney General to issue regulations that 
prohibit or otherwise restrict U.S. persons from engaging in a 
transaction where, among other things, the Attorney General has 
determined that a transaction ``is a member of a class of transactions 
. . . [that] pose an unacceptable risk to the national security of the 
United States because the transactions may enable countries of concern 
or covered persons to access bulk sensitive personal data or United 
States Government-related data in a manner that contributes to the 
national emergency declared in this [O]rder.'' \61\ Pursuant to the 
Order, the proposed rule categorically prohibited or, for the 
categories of restricted transactions, imposed security and other 
requirements on certain covered data transactions with U.S. persons and 
countries of concern or covered persons because the covered data 
transactions may otherwise enable countries of concern or covered 
persons to access government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data to harm U.S. national security.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \61\ 89 FR 15423.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The proposed rule defined a ``covered data transaction'' as any 
transaction that involves any access to any government-related data or 
bulk U.S. sensitive personal data and that involves: (1) data 
brokerage, (2) a vendor agreement, (3) an employment agreement, or (4) 
an investment agreement. As stated in the NPRM, the Department has 
determined that these categories of covered data transactions pose an 
unacceptable risk to U.S. national security because they may enable 
countries of concern or

[[Page 1646]]

covered persons to access government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data to engage in malicious cyber-enabled 
activities, track and build profiles on United States individuals for 
illicit purposes, including blackmail or espionage, and to intimidate, 
curb political dissent or political opposition, or otherwise limit 
civil liberties of U.S. persons opposed to countries of concern, among 
other harms to U.S. national security. For instance, one study has 
demonstrated that foreign malign actors can purchase bulk quantities of 
sensitive personal data about U.S. military personnel from data brokers 
``for coercion, reputational damage, and blackmail.'' \62\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \62\ Sherman et al., supra note 10, at 14.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Some commenters suggested that the final rule be limited to 
situations where government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data is made accessible by the U.S. person to the covered 
person or country of concern, and that it not apply in instances where 
(for example) a covered person sends bulk U.S. sensitive personal data 
to a U.S. person. The Department agrees that a U.S. person accessing 
data from a covered person ordinarily does not present the national 
security concerns that the rule seeks to address, and the Department 
does not intend the rule to cover that generic circumstance. Although 
commenters identified multiple ways to clarify this in the regulatory 
text, the Department clarifies this limitation by changing the 
definition of ``covered data transaction'' to cover only transactions 
that involve ``access by a country of concern or covered person.'' The 
rule includes a new example clarifying this limitation in Sec.  
202.210. This change also necessitates conforming changes to Sec.  
202.302 related to onward transfer provisions as explained in part 
IV.B.15 of this preamble.
    Other commenters requested clarity about whether the rule would 
apply to other transactions that are related to a covered data 
transaction but that do not themselves provide a country of concern or 
a covered person access to bulk U.S. sensitive personal data or 
government-related data. The revised definition of ``covered data 
transaction'' captures only those transactions that involve access by a 
country of concern or covered person to bulk U.S. sensitive personal 
data or government-related data, as the term ``access'' is defined in 
the rule. The rule does not impose any restrictions or prohibitions on 
transactions that do not involve access by a country of concern or 
covered person to government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data. For instance, a U.S. research institution that entered 
into a vendor agreement with a covered person cloud-services provider 
in a country of concern to store bulk U.S. personal health data or bulk 
human genomic data in a country of concern would have to comply with 
the security requirements mandated by subpart D. But the rule would not 
impose any restrictions or prohibitions on the ability of U.S. or 
foreign persons who are not covered persons to access or analyze the 
bulk U.S. sensitive personal data stored by a country of concern cloud-
services provider.
2. Section 202.301--Prohibited Data-Brokerage Transactions; Section 
202.214--Data Brokerage
    The NPRM proposed prohibiting any U.S. person from knowingly 
engaging in a covered data transaction involving data brokerage with a 
country of concern or a covered person. The proposed rule defined 
``data brokerage'' as the sale of data, licensing of access to data, or 
similar commercial transactions involving the transfer of data from any 
person (``the provider'') to any other person (``the recipient''), 
where the recipient did not collect or process the data directly from 
the individuals linked or linkable to the collected or processed data.
    Some comments expressed concern with the perceived breadth of the 
term ``data brokerage.'' These comments did not appropriately consider 
data brokerage in the context of the rest of the regulations (such as 
their exemptions, the other elements of the prohibitions and 
restrictions, and other related definitions that limit the scope and 
impact of data brokerage) and, as such, made exaggerated claims about 
its impacts without support or analysis. These comments were premised 
largely on imprecise hypotheticals or generalizations, or they 
misstated the regulations. In addition, none of these comments 
discussing data brokerage addressed the national security risk posed by 
countries of concern or covered persons accessing the digital footprint 
of sensitive personal data Americans leave behind when interacting with 
the modern world.
    Nevertheless, the Department considered each such comment and 
responds to the themes presented in them in the continuing discussion. 
To the extent that such commenters reiterated points or suggestions 
that were already addressed in the NPRM, the Department directs those 
commenters to the relevant discussions in the NPRM.\63\ Ultimately, the 
Department declines to make any changes to the prohibition in Sec.  
202.301, makes a limited change to the definition of ``data brokerage'' 
in Sec.  202.214, adds three new examples to the definition, and amends 
one existing example.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \63\ See, e.g., 89 FR 86130-31.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Some commenters recommended that the Department adjust the 
definition of data brokerage to expressly exclude activities that are 
already subject to one of the proposed rule's exemptions to ensure the 
proposed regulations do not inadvertently capture transactions that are 
well-regulated by financial services regulators. No change was made in 
response to this comment. The exemptions in subpart E already 
explicitly make clear that the prohibitions and restrictions in 
``subparts C and D do not apply to'' the categories of exempt 
transactions. And Sec.  202.301 (the provision prohibiting certain 
data-brokerage transactions) already explicitly applies ``[e]xcept as 
otherwise authorized pursuant to subparts E or H of this part or any 
other provision of this part,'' which includes the exemptions in 
subpart E. Adding another reference to this issue would be redundant 
and unnecessary.
    Some commenters expressed confusion about the supposed relationship 
or tension between data brokerage and vendor agreements, and suggested 
changes that would undermine the prohibitions and restrictions 
associated with those defined terms. For example, these commenters 
believed intra-company data transactions could be considered prohibited 
data brokerage but claimed that same transaction would only be 
restricted if engaged in pursuant to a vendor agreement. Some of these 
commenters and others also requested changes to the exemption for 
corporate group transactions in Sec.  202.506 to address their 
confusion.
    Data brokerage and vendor agreements are specifically tailored to 
address the risk to national security posed by a country of concern or 
covered person's access to government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data. While the commenters' hypothetical questions 
or concerns lack factual specificity, for additional clarity, the 
Department has amended the definition of ``data brokerage'' to 
explicitly exclude an employment, investment, or vendor agreement. This 
change helps ensure that the categories of prohibited transactions and 
restricted transactions remain mutually exclusive. Applying these 
definitions still involves a fact-specific analysis, as illustrated by

[[Page 1647]]

the accompanying examples. The Department also added two new examples 
at Sec. Sec.  202.214(b)(7) and (8) to further illustrate how companies 
primarily engaged in non-data brokerage activities might otherwise 
trigger the prohibition.
    In addition, to the extent that intra-company or internal data 
transactions satisfy the exemption under Sec.  202.506 because they are 
ordinarily incident to and part of administrative or ancillary business 
operations, those transactions would be exempt regardless of whether 
they are characterized as prohibited data brokerage or a restricted 
vendor agreement. Furthermore, after the effective date of the rule, 
the commenters and the broader public will have the opportunity to 
submit detailed requests for formal advisory opinions from the 
Department regarding any questions they have as to how these terms 
affect specific factual situations as opposed to hypothetical ones.
    At least one commenter suggested that the Department amend the 
definition of ``data brokerage'' by omitting the ``licensing of access 
to data'' and ``similar commercial transactions'' prongs, and by 
limiting the scope to those transactions where sensitive data is 
exchanged for consideration. In the alternative, the commenter 
suggested that the Department narrow the scope to apply to the specific 
types of transactions the Department intends to cover. The commenter 
argued that the current definition of ``data brokerage'' is overbroad 
and extends beyond ``bulk sensitive personal data'' to all data, and 
that a broad interpretation of ``similar commercial transactions'' 
could expand the scope of compliance and impact actors in several 
sectors such as e-commerce and analytics firms. Other commenters 
suggested striking ``similar commercial transactions'' from the 
definition or amending it, including by adopting standards found in 
certain State privacy laws. And others asked the Department to 
reiterate concepts like ``sensitive personal data'' in the definition 
of data brokerage.
    The Department declines to adopt these suggested approaches, parts 
of which were already discussed in the NPRM. The Department intends for 
the rule to cover a broad range of data brokerage transactions 
involving government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. 
Persons selling or reselling data to others are engaging in data 
brokerage, even if such activity is not that person's primary business 
activity. As noted in the NPRM, the proposed rule intentionally covered 
both first- and third-party data brokerage because countries of concern 
do not discriminate in how they seek to access government-related data 
or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. As such, the rule's broad 
definition is critical to ensuring there are no significant loopholes 
for countries of concern to continue to leverage the data brokerage 
market as a means of acquiring and exploiting government-related data 
or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data.
    The Department also notes these comments appear to misapply data 
brokerage and its relationship to other provisions of the regulations. 
For example, the prohibition on data brokerage does not apply to all 
data. It only applies to covered data transactions, which, is limited 
to government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. Adding 
sensitive personal data to the definition of the term would therefore 
be redundant. The phrase ``similar commercial transactions'' is 
intended to cover other commercial arrangements (beyond just sales and 
licensing) involving the transfer of government-related data or bulk 
U.S. sensitive personal data to countries of concern or covered 
persons. Commercial arrangements, by their nature, are engaged in for 
consideration. No further clarification of the phrase is warranted or 
necessary. Additionally, the exemption in Sec.  202.505 regarding 
financial services already ensures that the term ``similar commercial 
transactions'' would not inadvertently capture e-commerce activities. 
Moreover, these comments' suggestions do not realistically describe how 
or whether their recommended approaches would mitigate the national 
security risk associated with the rule's examples of data-brokerage 
activities other than sale or licensing.
    Another commenter suggested that to comply with the regulations, 
companies must first identify any data-brokerage activities they 
undertake, which the commenter claims is a daunting task. The commenter 
also warned that the definition would include activities beyond those 
engaged in by data brokerage firms. Many of the commenter's concerns 
were addressed in the preamble of the NPRM. The Department intends for 
data brokerage to encompass both first- and third-party data brokerage 
to address the national security risk the Order was intended to 
mitigate. That is a key national security feature of the program and is 
addressed earlier in part IV.B.2 of this preamble.
    With respect to how to comply with the regulations, the Department 
does not endorse any specific practice. The Department believes it is 
more effective to have U.S. persons develop compliance programs 
suitable to their own individualized risk profile, as explained in the 
NPRM.\64\ Such programs can vary based on a range of factors, including 
the U.S. person's size and sophistication, products and services, 
customers and counterparties, and geographic locations. The Department 
may issue guidance on this topic to assist U.S. persons to develop and 
implement compliance programs. Without fully knowing the commenter's 
situation, alternative approaches to compliance may be appropriate, 
such as first evaluating the company's exposure to countries of concern 
or covered persons, or their possession of or access to government-
related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data, to direct their 
compliance efforts.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \64\ 89 FR 86128.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    At least two commenters proposed exempting data-sharing platforms 
from the definition of ``data brokerage'' because such platforms do not 
determine what data is shared or reviewed before data is shared. These 
commenters generally claimed that without the requested exemption, such 
platforms would be required to review all data exchanges and underlying 
datasets, potentially creating new privacy and data security risks as 
well as possible contractual violations. The Department declines to 
adopt this proposal because it is unnecessary, redundant, and risks 
creating an exemption that could inadvertently undermine the purpose of 
the rule, thereby exacerbating the national security risk the Order is 
intended to mitigate. The prohibition in Sec.  202.301 requires 
``knowingly'' engaging in a covered data transaction involving data 
brokerage with a country of concern or covered person. As the examples 
in Sec. Sec.  202.230(b) and 202.305(b) illustrate, if a U.S. person 
merely provides infrastructure or a platform to a U.S. customer that 
uses the infrastructure or platform to engage in a prohibited or 
restricted transaction, the third-party infrastructure or platform 
provider would not generally have knowingly engaged in a prohibited or 
restricted transaction. However, it would be inappropriate for the rule 
to exempt third-party infrastructure or platform providers, as they 
could engage in their own transactions that would be prohibited or 
restricted, as also illustrated by the examples in Sec.  202.230(b) and 
Sec.  202.305(b).
    At least two commenters were concerned that without changes to the 
definition of ``data brokerage'' or the prohibition in Sec.  202.301, 
the regulations would adversely affect e-commerce or

[[Page 1648]]

the ability of U.S. persons to purchase goods and services. These 
concerns are unfounded because the prohibition does not reach exempted 
activities, including data transactions that are ordinarily incident to 
and part of the provision of financial services. Financial services 
include ``the transfer of personal financial data or covered personal 
identifiers incidental to the purchase and sale of goods and services'' 
and ``the provision or processing of payments or funds transfers.'' See 
Sec.  202.505(a)(4) and (5). Example 1 in Sec.  202.505(b)(1) also 
specifically addresses the issue of e-commerce.
    One comment expressed concern that U.S. persons engaged in data 
brokerage are unfairly targeted and encouraged the creation of a safe 
harbor for U.S. persons that conduct due diligence on data-brokerage 
transactions but are later deceived about a foreign adversary's 
ownership or control of a customer company. The Department declines to 
adopt the described safe harbor because it is unnecessary and 
redundant. The prohibition on data brokerage in Sec.  202.301 requires 
a U.S. person to act ``knowingly,'' which ``means that a person has 
actual knowledge, or reasonably should have known, of the conduct, the 
circumstance, or the result.'' See Sec.  202.230. Generally, U.S. 
persons engaged in data brokerage who are in fact deceived by countries 
of concern or covered persons, despite taking reasonable measures to 
comply with Sec.  202.301, would not be liable because they would not 
have had actual knowledge of, nor would they have reasonably known of, 
the circumstances. In addition, the Department intends to issue 
compliance and enforcement guidance following the publication of the 
final rule.
    Another commenter provided several open-ended hypotheticals about 
the applicability of the definition of ``data brokerage'' in Sec.  
202.214 to unfunded or nonprofit research. They asked whether a U.S. 
person's transfer of bulk sensitive personal data to a researcher in a 
country of concern could be considered data brokerage; whether such 
data transfers would be prohibited if they occurred because of mutual 
interest in the research; and whether the possibility of collaboration 
or co-authoring on a paper constitutes sufficient consideration to 
trigger the definition.
    The public will have the opportunity to submit detailed requests 
for formal advisory opinions after the effective date of the 
regulations. In that process, filers would provide non-hypothetical and 
specific facts on which the Department will render an opinion on the 
applicability of the regulations. Without more specific information or 
details, the Department can only provide general answers to these 
hypotheticals.
    As explained with respect to the comments on Sec.  202.511, while 
the rule is not limited to covered data transactions that occur for 
solely commercial purposes, the rule does limit data brokerage and the 
other categories of covered data transactions (and thus the 
prohibitions and restrictions) to transactions that are commercial in 
nature, meaning that they involve some payment or other valuable 
consideration. Generally, without more, a mutual interest in conducting 
research together, or the possibility of research collaboration or co-
authoring a paper, would not constitute the kind of valuable 
consideration needed to qualify as a covered data transaction. The 
Department added Examples 9 and 10 to Sec.  202.214 to clarify the 
circumstances to which the Department intends the rule to apply in the 
context of such research activities.
    Other commenters similarly sought clarification on whether and how 
the rule applies to nonprofit or non-commercial entities. The rule 
applies to data brokerage and investment, vendor, or employment 
transactions, as defined in the rule, without regard to the for-profit 
or not-for-profit nature of the U.S. person engaged in the transaction. 
Where a nonprofit engages in a covered data transaction--by, for 
example, entering a vendor agreement with a covered person to host bulk 
U.S. sensitive personal data--the rule applies. As the NPRM explained, 
the rule takes an activity-based approach because it is certain 
activities (transactions) that pose the unacceptable risks to national 
security and foreign policy, regardless of the kind of entity that 
engages in them.
    However, other provisions of the regulations might exempt otherwise 
prohibited or restricted data transactions engaged in by researchers. 
The Department has exempted data transactions arising from the official 
business of the United States Government, Federal law or international 
agreements, drug, biological, and medical device authorizations, and 
other clinical trials in Sec. Sec.  202.504, 202.507, 202.510, and 
202.511, respectively. Section 202.504 also covers data transactions 
conducted pursuant to a contract, grant, or other agreement with 
Federal departments and agencies, even when there is concurrent funding 
from non-Federal sources.
    At least one commenter suggested that prohibited data brokerage 
should be limited to circumstances in which the recipient of the data 
receives a right, remedy, power, privilege, or interest with respect to 
the data. The Department declines to make the suggested change because 
it fails to adequately address the national security risk posed by 
countries of concern or covered persons' access to government-related 
data and bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. The commenter's suggestion 
would undermine the data-brokerage prohibition and effectively give 
adversarial nations unfettered access to bulk U.S. sensitive personal 
data or government-related data. Subpart E of the regulations offer 
carefully tailored exemptions that balance the national security 
imperatives of the Order with legitimate economic and humanitarian 
activities, among others. Data transactions that qualify for such 
exemptions would not be prohibited under this program.
    One commenter sought clarification or changes regarding Example 4 
in Sec.  202.214 as to whether, assuming all other requirements of the 
prohibition in Sec.  202.301 were satisfied, internet Protocol (``IP'') 
addresses and advertising identifiers alone, without bulk precise 
geolocation information, would constitute prohibited data brokerage. 
The Department revised the example to clarify that a data transaction 
involving bulk quantities of U.S. users' IP addresses and advertising 
IDs would qualify as a prohibited data-brokerage transaction involving 
bulk covered personal identifiers because IP addresses and advertising 
IDs are listed identifiers. However, a data transaction involving only 
one of the listed identifiers--for example, only IP addresses--would 
not qualify as a covered data transaction because IP addresses in 
isolation do not qualify as sensitive personal data. Countries of 
concern may use IP addresses in some instances to aid in identifying 
the location of a particular device or user. However, the Department 
recognizes that IP addresses alone may not provide enough detailed 
information about a specific user or device to qualify as ``precise 
geolocation data.'' The Department understands that, in most commercial 
instances, IP addresses are collected in datasets that often contain 
well into the tens or hundreds of millions of such addresses and often 
involve other listed identifiers, as well. Given this reality, the 
Department will only treat IP addresses as a listed identifier, rather 
than also as precise geolocation data.

[[Page 1649]]

    Another commenter recommended narrowing the definition of ``data 
brokerage'' primarily by striking the phrase ``similar commercial 
transactions'' from the definition, which the Department discussed in 
part IV.B.2 of this preamble. The commenter also provided some high-
level examples of activities that they believe should not be considered 
data brokerage: (a) Marketplace sales, in which a third-party seller 
that is located in a country of concern or that is a covered person 
provides items for sale to U.S. persons on platforms owned by U.S. 
persons; (b) retail advertising networks that are owned by U.S. 
companies and that feature advertisers who are covered persons or that 
are based in a country of concern; (c) personal health data and human 
genomic data for scientific research and regulatory purposes; and (d) 
provisions of services to U.S. individuals abroad.
    As this preamble and the NPRM explained, the Department declines to 
revise the definition of ``data brokerage'' because it ``is 
intentionally designed and scoped to address the activity of data 
brokerage that gives rise to the national risk, regardless of the 
entity that engages in it'' [and] intentionally regulates data 
transactions'' that give rise to the risks the Order was intended to 
mitigate.\65\ The commenter did not address how or whether their 
recommended approach to data brokerage would mitigate such risk. In 
addition, the rule already accounts for the examples provided by the 
commenter. Transactions ordinarily incident to the provision of covered 
personal identifiers and personal financial data as part of e-commerce 
(such as marketplace sales) are generally exempt under the financial 
services exemption. With respect to scientific research and regulatory 
purposes, the rule does not prohibit research in a country of concern 
or research partnerships with a covered person that do not otherwise 
involve a covered data transaction. And the exemptions in Sec. Sec.  
202.510 and 202.511 already exempt certain data transactions arising 
from clinical trials and regulatory approvals in the context of drug, 
biological, and medical device authorizations. The commenter failed to 
provide sufficient specificity for the Department to address the other 
examples they provided. The recommended change, therefore, appears 
unnecessary at this time.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \65\ 89 FR 86131.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Because the data-brokerage prohibition, along with the other 
prohibitions and restrictions, center around data transactions 
involving access to government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data, the Department addresses the comments received on those 
key terms and related terms in detail in the following discussion.
3. Section 202.201--Access
    The proposed rule defined ``access'' as logical or physical access, 
including the ability to obtain, read, copy, decrypt, edit, divert, 
release, affect, alter the state of, or otherwise view or receive, in 
any form, including through information systems, information technology 
systems, cloud-computing platforms, networks, security systems, 
equipment, or software.
    One commenter requested that, to ensure that compliance mechanisms 
do not impede legitimate research activities, the Department 
distinguish data access and data export. The commenter interpreted 
``access'' to data as physically obtaining data, or as being able to 
analyze the data in a remote analysis environment where the data 
remains protected and cannot be exported. To this end, the commenter 
recommended addressing security concerns, while maintaining legitimate 
users' access to research data, by requiring data accessor attestation 
or by leveraging trusted research environments that adopt modern data 
protection methods and multi-layer security protocols.
    The Department declines to distinguish access from export. In the 
national security context, the Department views both access to 
government-related data and bulk U.S. sensitive personal data by a 
country of concern or covered person as synonymous with the export of 
such data to the same. Further, it is unclear to the Department whether 
something like a ``data accessor attestation'' would be sufficient to 
dissuade or prevent a country of concern's intelligence or security 
service from seeking to access sensitive data that may be contained in 
a secure research environment. The Department does not believe that 
these types of measures on their own mitigate the counterintelligence 
and other national security risks identified by the Order and parts II-
IV of this preamble. However, these types of measures could be one part 
of a broader risk-based compliance program implemented pursuant to the 
rule's requirements. Finally, it does not appear that such a change is 
necessary to minimize any impact on scientific and research activities, 
as the rule does not preclude research in a country of concern, or 
research collaborations or partnerships with covered persons, that do 
not involve any payment or other consideration as part of a covered 
data transaction.
    Another commenter suggested a technical correction in the final 
rule to avoid inadvertently causing restricted transactions that comply 
with the security requirements to no longer be considered covered data 
transactions. The Department appreciates this clarification, which it 
has adopted in the definition of ``access.''
    The final rule otherwise adopts the definition proposed in the NPRM 
without change.
4. Section 202.249--Sensitive Personal Data
    The NPRM defined six categories of ``sensitive personal data'' that 
could be exploited by a country of concern to harm U.S. national 
security if that data is linked or linkable to any identifiable U.S. 
individual or to a discrete and identifiable group of U.S. persons. 
These six categories are: (1) covered personal identifiers; (2) precise 
geolocation data; (3) biometric identifiers; (4) human genomic data; 
(5) personal health data; and (6) personal financial data. As explained 
in part IV.B.16 of this preamble, the Department has changed the 
reference to human genomic data to human `omic data in the final rule.
    One commenter requested that the Department confirm that physical 
and digital dental health data records are included within the scope of 
sensitive personal data. The commenter pointed out that unauthorized 
access to dental health data poses significant security risks, as they 
contain not only personal health information but also can serve as a 
unique forensic identifier. The Department agrees and confirms that 
physical and digital dental health records would generally fall within 
the existing definition of ``personal health data'' within the scope of 
sensitive personal data. Section 202.241 of the rule provides an 
inclusive definition for personal health data that encompasses 
information related to ``the past, present, or future physical or 
mental health or condition of an individual, the provision of 
healthcare to an individual, or the past, present, or future payment 
for the provision of healthcare to an individual.'' This term includes, 
for example, basic physical measurements and health attributes, social, 
psychological, behavioral, and medical diagnostic, intervention, and 
treatment history; test results; logs of exercise habits; immunization 
data, data on reproductive and sexual health; and data on the use of 
prescribed medications. The data contained in

[[Page 1650]]

dental records would generally relate to the past, present, or future 
physical health or condition of an individual and to the provision of 
healthcare to an individual, which the Department intentionally scoped 
broadly to avoid the risk of inadvertently omitting relevant health 
data types. This flexibility allows for new health-related fields or 
data types to be included in the future without needing to update the 
rule. Further, to the extent that any such dental health records 
constituted ``measurable physical characteristics or behaviors used to 
recognize or verify the identity of an individual,'' the definition of 
``biometric identifier'' included in ``sensitive personal data'' would 
capture those records. In light of the Department's confirmation and 
the existing definition, the Department does not believe it is 
necessary to adjust the inclusive definition of ``personal health 
data'' to refer to one specific type of personal health data.
    One commenter questioned the inclusion of human genomic data as a 
category of sensitive personal data, arguing against the ability to 
identify individuals solely through genetic testing and arguing that 
the NPRM overstates the predictability of human genomic data. The 
commenter agreed that knowledge of a person's genome may offer insights 
into potential risks and tendencies, but the commenter concluded, 
without citing any reference materials, that such data cannot 
accurately predict health, emotional stability, or mental capacity for 
most individuals. The commenter also suggested that it would be 
``impractical'' to design genetically targeted bioweapons against a 
specific individual or group. As noted in the NPRM, human genomic data 
is not only useful for identifying traits such as health, emotional 
stability, mental capacity, appearance, and physical abilities that 
might be useful in intelligence recruitment; countries of concern may 
also use this data to develop military capabilities such as 
bioweapons.\66\ Human genomic data, even when de-identified, can still 
be re-identified, particularly when combined with other datasets such 
as medical records, health information, public databases, or social 
media information. This potential for re-identification highlights the 
necessity of the national security protections set forth in the NPRM 
and this preamble. The commenter's contention that a foreign 
adversary's government would not leverage human genomic data due to 
such efforts being ``impractical'' is contrary to the publicly 
available assessments of the United States Government, including the 
U.S. Intelligence Community.\67\ For this and other reasons already 
discussed in the NPRM,\68\ the Department declines to adopt any change 
in response to this comment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \66\ Ken Dilanian, Congress Wants to Ban China's Largest 
Genomics Firm from Doing Business in the U.S. Here's Why, NBC News 
(Jan. 25, 2024), https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/nationalsecurity/congress-wants-ban-china-genomics-firm-bgi-from-us-rcna135698 
[https://perma.cc/T2Y2-R7RZ]; Ron Pulivarti et al., Nat'l Inst. Of 
Standards & Tech., NIST IR 8432, Cybersecurity of Genomic Data 9 
(2023), https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2023/NIST.IR.8432.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/5D3G-BEEZ].
    \67\ Nat'l Counterintel. & Sec. Ctr., China's Collection of 
Genomic and Other Healthcare Data from America: Risks to Privacy and 
U.S. Economic and National Security (Feb. 2021), https://www.dni.gov/files/NCSC/documents/SafeguardingOurFuture/NCSC_China_Genomics_Fact_Sheet_2021revision20210203.pdf [https://perma.cc/BL4H-WJSW].
    \68\ 89 FR 86156-65.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The proposed rule categorically excluded certain categories of data 
from the definition of the term ``sensitive personal data.'' These 
exclusions include public or nonpublic data that does not relate to an 
individual, including trade secrets and proprietary information, and 
data that is, at the time of the transaction, lawfully publicly 
available from government records or widely distributed media, personal 
communications as defined in Sec.  202.239, and information or 
informational materials as defined in Sec.  202.226. As discussed in 
further detail in part IV.B.15 of this preamble, the Department has 
refined the definition of ``sensitive personal data'' to ensure that 
the exclusion for publicly available data applies to each subcategory 
of sensitive personal data, and thus also applies to the term 
government-related data. In addition, as discussed in part IV.D.1 of 
this preamble, the Department has extended the exclusions to include 
certain metadata related to expressive information and informational 
materials.
    As noted in the NPRM, nothing in the final rule shall be construed 
to affect the obligations of United States Government departments and 
agencies under the Foundations for Evidence-Based Policymaking Act of 
2018, Public Law 115-435 (2019), 44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.
5. Section 202.212--Covered Personal Identifiers
    The Order defines ``covered personal identifiers'' as 
``specifically listed classes of personally identifiable data that are 
reasonably linked to an individual, and that--whether in combination 
with each other, with other sensitive personal data, or with other data 
that is disclosed by a transacting party pursuant to the transaction 
and that makes the personally identifiable data exploitable by a 
country of concern--could be used to identify an individual from a data 
set or link data across multiple data sets to an individual,'' subject 
to certain exclusions.\69\ The NPRM defined two subcategories of 
covered personal identifiers: (1) listed identifiers in combination 
with any other listed identifier; and (2) listed identifiers in 
combination with other data that is disclosed by a transacting party 
pursuant to the transaction, such that the listed identifier is linked 
or linkable to other listed identifiers or to other sensitive personal 
data. The definition included two exceptions: (1) demographic or 
contact data that is linked only to other demographic or contact data; 
and (2) a network-based identifier, account-authentication data, or 
call-detail data that is linked only to other network-based 
identifiers, account-authentication data, or call-detail data as 
necessary for the provision of telecommunications, networking, or 
similar services.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \69\ 89 FR 15428-29.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Multiple commenters requested that the Department clarify the 
applicability of the demographic data exclusion with respect to data 
brokerage. The Department directs the commenters to the definition of 
``covered personal identifier'' in Sec.  202.212(b), which excludes 
``[d]emographic or contact data that is linked only to other 
demographic or contact data.'' That definition, in combination with the 
examples provided, demonstrates how demographic data and data brokerage 
interact with one another. Example 3 in Sec.  202.212(c)(3) states that 
a ``first and last name linked to a residential street address, an 
email address linked to a first and last name, or a customer loyalty 
membership record linking a first and last name to a phone number--
would not constitute covered personal identifiers.''
    The data in this example does not satisfy the definition of 
``covered personal identifiers.'' Therefore, such data would not be 
considered sensitive personal data under Sec.  202.249, and a 
transaction involving such data would not be a covered data transaction 
under Sec.  202.210. In relevant part, Sec.  202.301 only prohibits 
U.S. persons from knowingly engaging in a covered data transaction 
involving data brokerage with a country of concern or covered person. 
Because there is no covered data transaction, a U.S. person would not 
be

[[Page 1651]]

prohibited from engaging in a data-brokerage transaction with a country 
of concern or covered person involving the data from this example.
    The same commenters also recommended that the Department amend the 
definition of ``covered personal identifier'' to exclude combinations 
of what the commenters claim to be low-risk identifiers, such as when 
advertising or device identifiers are combined with low-risk 
identifiers like IP addresses or contact data but not combined with any 
other information. The Department addressed this in the NPRM and 
declines to make the recommended change here. Specifically, the 
Department stated in the NPRM that ``covered personal identifiers and 
unique IDs can be used to link other datasets containing more 
exploitable information.'' \70\ For example, countries of concern and 
covered persons can use such identifiers to ``help link databases of 
habitual visitors to gambling sites with debt collection records or a 
database of government records. They could link advertising IDs, IP 
addresses, and [Subscriber Identity Module (``SIM'')] card numbers to 
personal mobile devices, home addresses, and government mobile 
devices.'' \71\ Additionally, the definition of ``covered personal 
identifier'' in Sec.  202.212 already excludes demographic or contact 
data that is linked only to other demographic or contact data.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \70\ 89 FR 86162.
    \71\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Several commenters took issue with the Department using a 
definition of ``covered personal identifier'' that is different than 
what is considered sensitive data under other laws. Because of this, 
the commenters recommended a broad exemption for any data that is 
processed by a covered person on behalf of a U.S. person where: (1) the 
purpose of the processing is product research, development, or 
improvement; (2) the U.S. person directs and controls the manner of 
processing the data; and (3) the covered person is contractually bound 
by the U.S. person to maintain the privacy and security of the data. At 
least one commenter objected to the inclusion of truncated government 
identification or account numbers in the definition of ``listed 
identifier.'' The commenters further requested an exemption for data 
provided or transferred by internet ecosystem providers in the ordinary 
course of providing internet exchange, traffic management, routing, and 
related services designed to optimize and secure access to services by 
internet end-users (except when involving data brokerage) in addition 
to an exemption for any combination of the following: (1) a device- or 
hardware-based identifier; (2) an advertising identifier; and (3) a 
network-based identifier.
    At least one of the commenters also made these recommendations in 
response to the ANPRM, and the Department considered them in the NPRM. 
However, the commenter provided no new information for the Department 
to act on or consider in this instance. The rule's use of the term 
``covered personal identifiers'' is much narrower than what is covered 
by various privacy-oriented laws and regulations. The Department has 
already adopted similar suggestions received from other commenters to 
arrive at a narrower category as described in Sec.  202.212(a)(2) and 
included several examples. See Sec.  202.212(c). Section 202.212(b)(2) 
excludes identifiers critical to the operation of services and devices 
``as necessary for the provision of telecommunications, networking, or 
similar service.'' \72\ The proposed exemption mirrors generally 
prevalent commercial contractual obligations between data controllers 
and data processors (as those terms are defined by various privacy 
laws). The Department declines to adopt these recommendations because 
these conditions are targeted at fulfilling privacy-law requirements 
and will not address the national security risks identified in the 
Order. In the absence of any new evidence or support, the Department 
declines to remove truncated government identification and account 
numbers from the definition of ``listed identifiers'' for the reasons 
detailed in the NPRM.\73\ The Department declines to add other internet 
service-related exemptions, as Sec.  202.212(b)(2) already contains the 
requested exclusion.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \72\ 89 FR 86206.
    \73\ 89 FR 86124.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    A commenter in the public research field applauded the proposed 
rule but suggested that Social Security numbers be classified as a 
covered personal identifiers. Social Security numbers are included in 
the definition of ``listed identifier'' in Sec.  202.234, which in turn 
is incorporated into the definition of ``covered personal identifiers'' 
in Sec.  202.212.
    Another commenter requested that the definition of ``covered 
personal identifiers'' exclude data that has been anonymized, de-
identified, pseudonymized, aggregated, or is otherwise considered 
publicly available in accordance with privacy laws. The Department 
declines to amend this definition. As the Department has explained in 
response to comments to the definitions of bulk U.S. sensitive personal 
data and sensitive personal data, even anonymized data, when 
aggregated, can be used by countries of concern and covered persons to 
identify individuals and to conduct malicious activities that implicate 
the risk to national security the Order was intended to address.
    One commenter recommended ``remov[ing] network identifiers from 
[the] set of listed identifiers,'' or that the Department eliminate 
Sec.  202.234(g) on network identifiers altogether. As the commenter 
noted, the Department has already carved out exceptions for network-
based identifier data that is only linked to other network-based 
identifier data. However, when these identifiers are linked to other 
types of sensitive personal data, the national security risks 
identified in the NPRM are more likely to be present. Therefore, the 
Department declines to implement the commenter's recommendations.
6. Section 202.234--Listed Identifier
    The proposed rule defined a ``listed identifier'' as any piece of 
data in any of the following data fields: (1) full or truncated 
government identification or account number (such as a Social Security 
number, driver's license or State identification number, passport 
number, or Alien Registration Number); (2) full financial account 
numbers or personal identification numbers associated with a financial 
institution or financial-services company; (3) device-based or 
hardware-based identifier (such as International Mobile Equipment 
Identity (``IMEI''), Media Access Control (``MAC'') address, or 
Subscriber Identity Module (``SIM'') card number); (4) demographic or 
contact data (such as first and last name, birth date, birthplace, ZIP 
code, residential street or postal address, phone number, email 
address, or similar public account identifiers); (5) advertising 
identifier (such as Google Advertising ID, Apple ID for Advertisers, or 
other mobile advertising ID (``MAID'')); (6) account-authentication 
data (such as account username, account password, or an answer to a 
security question); (7) network-based identifier (such as internet 
Protocol (``IP'') address or cookie data); or (8) call-detail data 
(such as Customer Proprietary Network Information (``CPNI'')). See 
Sec.  202.234.
    One commenter suggested that the Department remove the fifth 
category (advertising identifiers) from the definition of ``listed 
identifiers,'' arguing that advertising identifiers are not

[[Page 1652]]

personal information and that prohibiting the free flow of advertising 
identifiers will seriously affect the development of the internet 
advertising industry. The Department disagrees. As articulated in the 
NPRM, advertising identifiers combined with other types of covered 
personal identifiers are indeed linked or linkable to an individual and 
therefore are included in the scope of bulk U.S. sensitive personal 
data.
    One commenter recommended that the Department remove any reference 
to IP addresses from the rule due to the potential for businesses to 
refrain from or be hindered in providing communications and 
cybersecurity services. The commenter asserted that the NPRM referenced 
IP addresses in multiple ways that deviate from their normal use. 
Specifically, the commenter highlighted that IP addresses are sometimes 
associated with more than one individual, and that one individual may 
use multiple IP addresses depending on their location (at home, on 
their mobile device, at work, etc.).
    Further, the commenter identified alternative identifiers such as 
call detail data and contact data that are frequently used with IP 
addresses, suggesting that including IP addresses is redundant. 
Finally, the commenter notes the challenges that entities have had in 
complying with foreign laws that regulate IP addresses as personal data 
and suggested that regulating IP addresses in this rule will further 
strain those entities.
    The Department notes that the definition of ``covered personal 
identifiers'' in Sec.  202.212(b)(2) excludes network-based identifier, 
account-authentication data, or call-detail data that is linked only to 
other network-based identifier, account-authentication data, or call-
detail data as necessary for the provision of telecommunications, 
networking, or similar service. The Department disagrees that the 
inclusion of IP addresses is unnecessary and should be removed from the 
rule. IP addresses are capable of being linked or linkable to a U.S. 
person and can provide location data (including, in some circumstances, 
precise geolocation data). The fact that IP addresses are sometimes 
shared or could be attributed to more than one person in some 
circumstances does not preclude them from also being capable of 
identifying U.S. persons. To the contrary, even when they can be 
attributed to more than one person in some circumstances, IP addresses 
can be useful in narrowing down, and thus increasing the 
identifiability of, other data that is linked or linkable to a U.S. 
person. As the NPRM explained, location data that can be derived from 
an IP address can provide important information related to patterns of 
life, such as when a person goes from home to work and other locations.
    Finally, the rule already separately exempts (1) from the 
definition of covered personal identifiers, network-based identifiers, 
call-detail data, or account-authentication data that is linked only to 
other network-based identifiers, call-detail data, or account-
authentication data; (2) from the prohibitions and restrictions, any 
transaction that is ordinarily incident to the provision of 
telecommunications services; and (3) from the prohibitions and 
restrictions, personal communications. The comment did not identify 
what specific non-exempt transactions with countries of concern or 
covered persons remain that would be prohibited or restricted, nor did 
it explain how those transactions are integral to the delivery of 
communications or cybersecurity services. No change to the rule appears 
necessary.
7. Section 202.242--Precise Geolocation Data
    The proposed rule defined ``precise geolocation data'' as data, 
whether real-time or historical, that identifies the physical location 
of an individual or a device with a precision of within 1,000 meters. 
Two commenters suggested that the Department narrow the geographic 
radius of precise geolocation data to align with U.S. State privacy 
laws. No change was made in response to these comments. As a threshold 
matter, the rule is already consistent with privacy laws when 
accounting for available options on most devices. Specifically, the 
California Privacy Rights Act, which a few commenters cited as the 
standard the Department should follow, includes a geographic radius of 
1,850 feet (approximately 563 meters).\74\ As indicated in the NPRM, 
the Department considered State privacy laws with which companies are 
already familiar, and which provide examples of the level of precision 
at which a device's location warrants protection. Furthermore, as the 
NPRM explained, the Department also examined Android and iOS software 
developers' available settings for the precision of geolocation 
readings, which included accuracy to within 10 meters, 100 meters, 
1,000 meters, 3,000 meters, and 10,000+ meters.\75\ As discussed in the 
NPRM, the Department concluded that location data at a distance greater 
than 100 meters was still considered precise and presented an 
unacceptable risk to national security, so the Department selected 
1,000 meters as the option that most carefully balanced the risk that 
countries of concern or covered persons could exploit U.S. persons' 
precise geolocation data and current technology practices and 
standards.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \74\ See, e.g., Cal. Civ. Code sec. 1798.140(w) (which uses a 
radius of 1,850 feet); Utah Consumer Privacy Act, Utah Code Ann. 
sec. 13-61-101(33)(a) (West 2024) (which uses a radius of 1,750 
feet).
    \75\ CLLocationAccuracy, Apple Developer, https://developer.apple.com/documentation/corelocation/cllocationaccuracy 
[https://perma.cc/AZ48-VSCP]; Change Location Settings, Android 
Developer, https://developer.android.com/develop/sensors-and-location/location/change-location-settings [https://perma.cc/5BY3-P7L3].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter suggested lowering the geographical location range 
from 1,000 meters to 100 meters, arguing that the proposed range was 
too wide and may include many civil facilities, such as enterprises, 
factories, and houses. The Department believes geolocation data within 
a distance of 1,000 meters to be precise. For example, in guidance to 
its members, the Network Advertising Initiative,\76\ a non-profit trade 
group that crafts policies that protect users' privacy in the 
advertising technology and digital advertising space, stated, ``If a 
member receives information locating a user or device to an area with a 
size of 1,000 [square] meters, that member can render the data 
imprecise by only storing information that the user or device was in an 
area with a size of 800,000 meters.'' \77\ Further to the point, this 
comment seems to confuse the government-related geolocation data list 
in Sec.  202.1401, with the distance of precise geolocation data for 
the other regulated covered data transactions in Sec.  202.242. The 
Department declines to adopt the recommendation.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \76\ Network Advert. Initiative, About the NAI, https://thenai.org/about-the-nai2/ [https://perma.cc/GFN4-DVZ3] (showing 
that the Network Advertising Initiative (NAI) is a non-profit, self-
regulatory association dedicated to responsible data collection and 
its use for digital advertising).
    \77\ Network Advert. Initiative, Guidance for NAI Members: 
Determining Whether Location is Imprecise 3 (Feb. 2020), https://thenai.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/nai_impreciselocation2.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/U7CS-YHR5].2020).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The definition of ``sensitive personal data'' excludes public or 
nonpublic data that does not relate to an individual. Two commenters 
requested clarity on the meaning of the exclusion ``does not relate to 
an individual'' from sensitive personal data in the context of precise 
geolocation data. In particular, the commenters sought a definition of 
what ``relate to an individual'' means or a clarifying example to 
explain what relates to an individual means when precise geolocation 
data is defined

[[Page 1653]]

regarding an individual or a device. They note that precise geolocation 
data is defined in terms of U.S. devices, and therefore precise 
geolocation data that is de-identified should be excluded from the 
scope of the rule.
    The Department does not believe it is necessary to create a new 
definition regarding ``relate to an individual.'' This phrase in the 
exclusionary language of Sec.  202.249(b)(1) is intended to avoid 
regulation of proprietary data, trade secrets, and other data that does 
not have to do with individuals. Similarly, the term ``U.S. device'' is 
already limited to devices that ``store or transmit data that is linked 
or linkable to a U.S. person.'' See Sec.  202.257. This definition does 
not capture all geolocation data that derives from a U.S. device. For 
example, a company may use U.S. devices to track the geolocation data 
of corporate assets or packages for delivery without tying that data to 
the individual using the device. That data would not constitute precise 
geolocation data because the location of corporate assets or packages 
does not ``relate to an individual'' and because the data is not 
``linked or linkable to a U.S. person.'' If, however, the company ties 
the geolocation data of those assets or packages to the individual 
handling the U.S. device, the geolocation data would ``relate to an 
individual'' and would be ``linked or linkable to a U.S. person.'' Of 
course, how the U.S. company collects and handles that data in the 
United States would not be regulated by the rule; only non-exempt 
transactions that are prohibited or restricted involving that precise 
geolocation data would be regulated under the rule.
8. Section 202.204--Biometric Identifiers
    The proposed rule defined ``biometric identifiers'' as measurable 
physical characteristics or behaviors used to recognize or verify the 
identity of an individual, including facial images, voice prints and 
patterns, retina and iris scans, palm prints and fingerprints, gait, 
and keyboard usage patterns that are enrolled in a biometric system and 
the templates created by the system.
    One commenter raised concerns that the proposed definition is 
broader than the current understanding of the term and claimed it could 
include photos or pictures. The commenter suggested that the Department 
narrow the definition of ``biometric identifiers'' to only include data 
that relates to personal characteristics, has been processed using 
specific technologies, and can uniquely identify a person. The 
commenter asserted, without support, that this definition is closer to 
the traditional understanding of the term and would therefore align 
with existing compliance activities.
    The Department declines to adopt this recommendation. The 
definition of ``biometric identifiers'' already includes similar 
limitations; biometric identifiers are defined as ``measurable physical 
characteristics or behaviors used to recognize or verify the identity 
of an individual.'' See Sec.  202.204. Further, adding a technological 
processing component to the definition prevents any kind of raw data 
from meeting the definition of a biometric identifier, allowing 
countries of concern to acquire biometric identifiers and then conduct 
the technological processing themselves. Limiting the definition to 
data processed using specific technologies would also risk allowing new 
technological developments to undermine the definition. The Department 
believes this definition is effectively scoped to the national security 
risk, and declines to narrow the definition, particularly based on 
unsubstantiated compliance benefits. Finally, the rule already 
separately excludes expressive information or informational materials 
from all of the categories of sensitive personal data (including 
biometric identifiers), so it appears unnecessary and redundant to 
adjust this specific definition to address the commenter's concern. 
Therefore, the Department makes no change to the definition of 
``biometric identifiers'' in the final rule.
9. Section 202.224--Human `Omic Data
    The proposed rule sought comment on the effect of regulating human 
genomic data and whether to regulate other categories of human `omic 
data. Several commenters expressed concerns about regulating covered 
data transactions involving human genomic data. For example, some 
commenters opposed setting the same bulk threshold for human genomic 
data that involves the ``entire set . . . of the genetic instructions 
found in a human cell'' and data that involves a ``subset'' of such 
instructions, as the rule defines ``human genomic data.'' See Sec.  
202.224(a)(1). Commenters explained that there is a low risk of 
identifying a single individual from a subset of genetic instructions, 
incomplete human genomes, or data about single genes that do not reveal 
information that is consequential to the health of a U.S. person or 
particular U.S. populations. The Department declines to change the 
threshold for human genomic data. As described in the NPRM, countries 
of concern, including the PRC, ``view . . . genomic data as a strategic 
commodity to be collected and used for its economic and national 
security priorities.'' \78\ As the NPRM explains, this data poses risks 
not only for ``identifying traits such as health, emotional stability, 
mental capacity, appearance, and physical abilities that might be 
useful in intelligence recruitment,'' but also because ``countries of 
concern may also use this data to develop military capabilities such as 
bioweapons.'' \79\ The Department declines to raise the bulk threshold 
applied to bulk human genomic data because the national security risks 
posed by country of concern access to such data include risks unrelated 
to a country of concern's ability to identify particular individuals or 
U.S. populations from such data.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \78\ 89 FR 86142.
    \79\ 89 FR 86157.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Other commenters questioned the necessity of the rule, arguing that 
current research practices already handle genetic data securely with 
strong privacy considerations, such as de-identification and 
pseudonymization. As the NPRM explains, however, ``advances in 
technology, combined with access by countries of concern to large 
datasets, increasingly enable countries of concern that access this 
data to re-identify or de-anonymize data,'' allowing them to ``reveal 
exploitable sensitive personal information on U.S. persons.'' \80\ 
Accordingly, the Department declines to exempt from its prohibitions 
and restrictions human genomic data that has been de-identified or 
pseudonymized, outside the exemptions permitted by Sec. Sec.  202.510 
and 202.511, which are subject to additional oversight by the Federal 
Government or support data sharing necessary for regulated parties to 
obtain or maintain regulatory approval or authorization to market or 
research drugs or other products. In addition, some commenters 
expressed concerns that the rule could impose unwanted administrative 
burdens on U.S. researchers by creating roadblocks to data sharing, 
thereby potentially decreasing the global competitiveness of U.S. 
genetics research. The Department has calibrated the rule to balance 
the interests in maintaining U.S. competitiveness in science and 
research with the pressing national security risks identified by the 
Order and in this rulemaking. The Department has adopted, clarified, 
and revised exemptions in part IV.E of this preamble to help alleviate 
the burden on

[[Page 1654]]

individuals conducting human genomic-related research.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \80\ 89 FR 86126.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter noted the risk that policy makers and the media could 
portray human genetic data as exceptional and dangerous, which could 
erode public trust in scientists and negatively impact recruitment for 
research studies. The Department appreciates the commenter's concern 
but notes that the U.S. intelligence community has identified specific 
national security risks posed by country of concern access to bulk U.S. 
human genomic data that the rule seeks to mitigate and that outweigh 
the speculative and indirect risks to public trust in scientists 
asserted by the commenter.\81\ Finally, the commenter contended that it 
is difficult to identify individuals solely through genetic testing, 
arguing that the predictability of human genomic data is overstated in 
the NPRM. As described elsewhere in part IV.B.9 of this preamble, 
country of concern access to bulk human genomic data poses national 
security risks beyond identifying discrete individuals or populations 
that the rule's restrictions and prohibitions are intended to mitigate.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \81\ See, e.g., 89 FR 86142, 86178.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    In the NPRM, the Department sought comments about whether and how 
it should regulate transactions involving access to bulk human `omic 
data other than human genomic data. The Department received several 
comments on this topic, including one that supported robust regulation 
and others that either opposed including other human `omic data in the 
rule or proposed delaying its inclusion to a separate rulemaking. After 
further consideration, the Department has determined in the final rule 
to treat three categories of other human `omic data--epigenomic data, 
proteomic data, and transcriptomic data--similarly to its treatment of 
human genomic data. The bulk threshold for these additional categories 
of human `omic data will be higher than for human genomic data. The 
Department is not including any other categories of human `omic data in 
the rule at this time. The Department incorporates this change by 
defining a new term, ``human `omic data,'' that includes human genomic 
data and each of the three listed other human `omic categories.
    At a high level, the `omics sciences examine biological processes 
that contribute to the form and function of cells and tissues.\82\ Many 
commenters urged the Department to move cautiously in regulating other 
human `omic data to avoid disrupting the development of new and 
promising fields of research. Although none of these comments spoke 
with any specificity about the risks of regulating covered data 
transactions as contemplated by the NPRM, the Department agrees that a 
cautious approach is needed.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \82\ See, e.g., Evolution of Translational Omics: Lessons 
Learned and the Path Forward 23, 33 (Christine M. Micheel et al., 
eds., 2012), https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK202168/pdf/Bookshelf_NBK202168.pdf [https://perma.cc/Q5YE-7XLM].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The Department recognizes that not all categories of human `omics 
data present the same degree of risk if accessed by a country of 
concern or covered person. Data from some human `omic categories, for 
example, do not present the same identifiability concerns that exist 
for human genomic data. But the Department remains deeply concerned by 
the national security risk associated with transactions involving human 
epigenomic, proteomic, or transcriptomic data. The fields of 
epigenomics, proteomics, and transcriptomics are--after genomics--the 
most advanced `omic fields.\83\ Generally speaking, epigenomics is the 
study of changes in gene expression that do not involve alterations to 
the DNA sequence itself. The field of proteomics generally aims to 
identify and characterize proteins and study their structures, 
functions, interactions, and post-translational modifications. The 
field of transcriptomics generally aims to understand gene expression 
patterns, alternative splicing, and regulation of RNA molecules. These 
three human `omic categories have the greatest clinical and predictive 
capacity, especially when used in combination with genomics and other 
`omic categories, because they are most closely related to genomics.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \83\ Carly S. Cox et al., Information Gathered on the Potential 
Impact of Including Omic Data in a Rule on Access to Sensitive U.S. 
Data, Appendix A (Science and Technology Policy Institute, Nov. 
2024) [hereinafter STPI Report] (citing Dai and Shen 2022). The full 
STPI Report is available on regulations.gov (Docket No. NSD-104).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Data in these categories may be used by countries of concern in 
numerous ways. This includes risk related to identifiability, 
particularly for human transcriptomic data, but also, as one commenter 
indicated, for human epigenomic data, human proteomic data, and human 
meta-multiomic data.\84\ But the risks are not limited to 
identifiability, and countries of concern might leverage access to bulk 
U.S. human `omic data in other ways that are adverse to U.S. national 
interests. The same attributes that make this data useful for general 
research make it potentially useful for nefarious purposes--for 
example, to train AI systems enabling the military capabilities of 
adversaries and undermining the U.S. bioeconomy. Additionally, 
classified reporting reviewed by the Department further underscores the 
risks of allowing countries of concern to access U.S. person data in 
these categories.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \84\ See, e.g., Patrycja Daca-Roszak & Ewa Zietkiewicz, 
Transcriptome Variation in Human Populations and Its Potential 
Application in Forensics, 60 J. Appl. Genet. 319 (Nov. 2019), 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13353-019-00510-1.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    In addition to the comments, the Department has also reviewed a 
November 2024 limited study performed by the Science and Technology 
Policy Institute (``STPI'') that sought to preliminarily evaluate the 
effect on ongoing or planned research if the Department regulated human 
genomic and other human `omic data in this rulemaking.\85\ That study, 
which used various methods to estimate the effect of the contemplated 
regulations on research efforts (including surveying and interviewing 
potentially impacted stakeholders), concluded that there was unlikely 
to be substantial disruption to research. The report, though limited by 
its scope and methodology, concluded that only ``a small proportion of 
the U.S. research community is participating in research that involves 
collaboration with a country of concern'' and that even ``among groups 
that do have existing research collaborations with a country of 
concern, none of those collaborations involved data sharing that would 
constitute a transaction of bulk human `omic data.'' \86\ STPI's review 
of clinical trials identified only a single clinical trial that is 
currently active in the United States, involves more than 100 
participants, gathers `omic (in this case, transcriptomic and genomic) 
data, and has a site in China.\87\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \85\ See STPI Report, supra note 83.
    \86\ Id. at 38.
    \87\ Id. at 40. The report found generally low levels of 
clinical trials of any sort that also involved a site in a country 
of concern.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Most of the concerns identified in the STPI report arose from 
general compliance concerns, such as that Federal funding entities 
would impose different requirements or that researchers would have to 
adjust computer security protocols. For example, one interviewee noted 
that it took substantially longer to build infrastructure to facilitate 
data sharing when cybersecurity requirements had to be met.\87\ Another 
thought that research would be slowed because of confusion

[[Page 1655]]

about the scope of the rule during implementation.\88\ One interviewee 
observed that the institutional burden of complying with new rules 
would limit collaboration with researchers in countries of concern.\89\ 
It is hard to disentangle these concerns from the other provisions of 
the rule, and it is likely that also regulating these three categories 
of other human `omic data will pose only limited marginal costs to 
research and industry compared to the costs attributable to other 
aspects of the rule, including the provisions pertaining to human 
genomic data. Indeed, one interviewee expressly predicted that 
including other human `omic data in the scope of the regulation would 
have no change on the regulatory burden because `omic research almost 
always also involves genomic data.\90\
    Given the significant national security risks posed by country of 
concern or covered person access to these data, the limited available 
evidence to characterize the marginal disruptive effect of regulating 
these human `omics categories, and the immaturity of research and 
commercialization of these human `omics and related applications at 
present, the Department has determined to regulate these three 
categories of human `omic data.
    One commenter expressed support for the inclusion of provisions 
regulating other human `omic data, noting that these restrictions will 
significantly bolster U.S. biodefense and biosecurity. The commenter 
noted that bulk human `omics data should be viewed as providing insight 
into how the body is affected by changes in the environment and diet, 
by infectious and non-communicable diseases, or by other circumstances. 
The commenter encouraged the Department to implement regulations 
restricting the transfer of human `omic data, noting that if the United 
States is concerned about an outside entity using human genomic data to 
maliciously attack the American public via biological threats, then the 
information gathered via other human `omic data--especially proteomics 
and metabolomics--should be considered equally and perhaps more 
sensitive. The Department appreciates this comment. For the current 
rulemaking, however, the Department has chosen to focus on the most 
acute threats related to human `omic data. The Department may revisit 
regulating transactions involving additional human `omic data in future 
rulemaking.
    One comment offered specific and helpful suggestions for revising 
the Department's proposed definitions. The Department greatly 
appreciates this comment and has incorporated the commenter's 
suggestions as applicable to the three additional categories of human 
`omic data in the final rule. For example, the definition of ``human 
proteomic data'' now expressly excludes routine clinical measurements. 
The Department made similar changes to the definitions of ``human 
epigenomic data'' and ``human transcriptomic data.'' The final rule 
also clarifies that human proteomic, human epigenomic, and human 
transcriptomic data include only data derived from a systems-level 
analysis.
    In the NPRM, the Department indicated it was considering carving 
out pathogen data in `omic datasets. One commenter strongly supported 
this exclusion, explaining that pathogen-related data serves important 
and unique public health functions. In the preamble to the NPRM, the 
Department explained that it would take a similar approach to that 
which the commenter suggested with respect to human genomic data; in 
the final rule the Department expressly excludes from the definition of 
``human `omic data'' pathogen-specific data embedded in `omic data 
sets.
    Another commenter stressed that, if the Department includes other 
human `omic data, it must also include them in the exemptions in 
subpart E, including for regulatory approval data and clinical 
investigations in Sec. Sec.  202.510 and 202.511. The Department 
agrees. Those provisions already exempt transactions within their scope 
from the provisions in subparts B and C, which are the operative 
provisions prohibiting or restricting transactions. Application of 
those exemptions does not turn on the type of data involved, and the 
exemptions apply equally to transactions involving human `omic data as 
to other categories of sensitive personal data.
    Numerous commenters stressed that bulk thresholds for the other 
human `omic categories identified in the NPRM should vary with risk and 
should be higher than the threshold for human genomic data. Commenters 
did not provide specific input on what those thresholds should be or 
which `omics categories should have relatively higher or lower 
thresholds (except that phenomics probably presented a lower risk). The 
three additional `omic categories the Department is regulating are 
those with the greatest national security risks at this time, but the 
Department agrees that, given the nascency of these fields and the 
relatively greater difficulty of using these `omic data for 
identification, the bulk thresholds for these categories should be 
higher than for human genomic data. Some stakeholders requested simpler 
rules to minimize compliance costs, and the Department recognizes that, 
independent of individual risk analysis, there is a benefit to setting 
the thresholds for all human `omics categories at the same level. But, 
in many use cases, this type of data is used together with genomic 
data, and so there may be limited practical effects to setting 
different thresholds for these human `omics categories.\88\ For these 
reasons, the Department uses a threshold of 1,000 U.S. persons for all 
these three additional categories of human `omic data (epigenomic, 
proteomic, and transcriptomic data), while maintaining the 100 U.S. 
person threshold for human genomic data set out in the NPRM.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \88\ See, e.g., STPI Report, supra note 83, at 17.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

10. Section 202.240--Personal Financial Data
    The proposed rule defined ``personal financial data'' as data about 
an individual's credit, charge, or debit card, or bank account, 
including purchases and payment history; data, including assets, 
liabilities, debts, and transactions in a bank, credit, or other 
financial statement; or data in a credit report or in a ``consumer 
report'' (as defined in 15 U.S.C. 1681a(d)).
    One commenter sought clarification on whether ``personal financial 
history'' pertains solely to transactions with financial institutions 
or includes all purchase and payment history. The Department interprets 
this question as asking about the scope of the term personal financial 
data. The Department confirms that personal financial data in Sec.  
202.240, including payment history, applies across the board. It is not 
limited to purchases and payment history collected only by financial 
institutions.
    Another commenter suggested that the Department clarify that 
personal financial data only includes information from sources like 
banks or credit statements, and not from vendors, merchants, search 
engines, or e-commerce records. The Department declines to adopt the 
recommendation. While such records are not automatically considered 
personal financial data, any record that contains ``data about an 
individual's credit, charge, or debit card, bank account, including 
purchases and payment history, and data in a bank, credit, or other 
financial statement, or in a credit report or consumer report'' meets 
the definition. See Sec.  202.240. The same commenter suggested that 
personal

[[Page 1656]]

financial data should only be restricted when it comes directly from an 
individual's bank accounts. However, the focus of the definition in the 
final rule is on the content of the records, documents, or information 
containing personal financial data, not necessarily the source. As the 
proposed rule explained, countries of concern and covered persons seek 
such personal financial data from any source and can combine it with 
other data to create vulnerabilities that malicious actors might 
exploit, posing national security risks.\89\ Therefore, the Department 
declines to limit the definition based on the data source.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \89\ See, e.g., 89 FR 86161.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

11. Section 202.241--Personal Health Data
    The proposed rule defined ``personal health data'' as health 
information that relates to the past, present, or future physical or 
mental health or condition of an individual; the provision of 
healthcare to an individual; or the past, present, or future payment 
for the provision of healthcare to an individual. The term includes 
basic physical measurements and health attributes (such as bodily 
functions, height and weight, vital signs, symptoms, and allergies); 
social, psychological, behavioral, and medical diagnostic, 
intervention, and treatment history; test results; logs of exercise 
habits; immunization data; data on reproductive and sexual health; and 
data on the use or purchase of prescribed medications.
    One commenter suggested that the Department remove ``or the past, 
present, or future payment for the provision of healthcare to an 
individual,'' ``social, psychological, behavioral,'' and ``logs of 
exercise habits'' from the definition of ``personal health 
information.'' This commenter argued that medical expenditures are 
helpful to the construction and communication of medical treatment 
systems but cannot directly reflect someone's disease diagnosis and 
treatment, and thus should not be restricted. The same commenter also 
asserted, without explanation, that social, psychological, behavioral 
and sports habits are too broad to pose any threat to national 
security. The Department declines to adopt the recommendation. Medical 
expenditures can be revealing about the nature of a diagnosis or 
medical issue. For example, medical billing statements often come with 
diagnostic codes to show the services provided by a medical 
practitioner or facility. An expenditure in a specific location (e.g., 
an oncology office, obstetrics office, or dialysis center) can 
similarly reveal information about health conditions. Likewise, data 
such as social, psychological, or behavioral habits on a specific 
individual can be exploited by a country of concern as a means of 
recruitment by an intelligence service (particularly via blackmail or 
coercion). This data in the hands of a country of concern could 
certainly pose a risk to U.S. national security, as shown by numerous 
open-source examples in this preamble and the NPRM's preamble in which 
reporters and researchers used precisely this kind of data (such as 
exercise logs) to track, surveil, and glean insights on U.S. military 
activities and personnel overseas. The rule thus adopts the approach 
described in the NPRM without change.
    As the NPRM described, this proposed definition operates on a 
categorical basis and determines that the category of personal health 
data generally meets the requirements of being ``exploitable by a 
country of concern to harm United States national security'' and 
``linked or linkable to any identifiable United States individual or to 
a discrete and identifiable group of United States individuals'' under 
section 7(l) of the Order. The Department welcomed comment on the 
extent to which there is discrete data related to an individual's 
physical or mental health condition that is not inherently linked or 
linkable to U.S. individuals (such as a dataset of only heights or 
weights with no identifying information).
    Commenters did not address the Department's question. Instead, 
several commenters raised issues with the Department's use of the term 
``relates'' in the proposed rule's definition of ``personal health 
data.'' The commenters urged the Department to define the term, or to 
narrow the definition of ``personal health data'' to replace the term 
``relates'' with other terms, such as ``identifies'' or ``reveals.'' 
They contended that data that ``relates'' to an individual, but does 
not identify an individual, has a low potential to cause harm but is 
essential to commerce, access to goods and services, and to ensuring 
that innovation is not stifled. One commenter mentioned that the term 
``relates'' is so broad that it could apply to the sale not only of a 
prescription, but also to innocuous retail purchases that relate to a 
condition but do not identify it, such as the purchase of tissues at a 
supermarket.
    The Department has revised the definition of ``personal health 
data'' to provide greater clarity, particularly for regulated parties 
not typically governed by the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996 (``HIPAA'') or familiar with its 
terminology. Personal health data within the rule's scope must 
indicate, reveal, or describe the past, present, or future physical or 
mental health condition of an individual; the provision of healthcare 
to an individual; or the past, present, or future payment for the 
provision of healthcare to an individual.
    However, the Department declines to replace the term ``relates'' 
with the term ``identifies.'' The commenters do not support their 
assertion that data that does not identify individuals on its face has 
a low potential to cause harm. The rule intentionally does not define 
personal health information in terms of whether the information 
identifies individuals, because the rule applies across the board, 
regardless of whether data is de-identified. This approach responds to 
the national security risks posed by countries of concern that may have 
the ability to re-identify the data. The Department discussed these 
risks in detail in the NPRM, and in part IV.B.4 of this preamble. The 
Department also notes that the definition of ``personal health data'' 
includes an illustrative list of the types of data that the term 
includes, including the use or purchase of prescribed medications. 
Although this list is not exhaustive, it demonstrates the kinds of 
personal health information that the Department intends the definition 
to cover.
    One commenter contended that the HIPAA de-identification standards 
are out of date, and do not protect individuals in today's data-rich 
and computational-rich environment. The commenter commended the NPRM 
for addressing the ever-increasing ability to re-identify supposedly 
de-identified data, requested that traditional de-identified HIPAA data 
be subject to the final rule, and further proposed that de-identified 
personal health data such as medical records, pharmacy records, and 
reproductive health records or purchases be covered by the final rule. 
The Department agrees with this recommendation.
    One commenter agreed with the need to regulate personal health data 
and suggested that the Department discuss the regulations with 
electronic medical record organizations and hospital associations. The 
Department, both on its own and with other agencies, discussed the NPRM 
with 44 medical organizations, associations, and other stakeholders 
that will be impacted by the regulations, comprised of healthcare trade 
associations, biotechnology

[[Page 1657]]

organizations, research laboratories, and universities.
12. Section 202.206--Bulk U.S. Sensitive Personal Data
    The prohibitions and restrictions apply to ``bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data,'' which the proposed rule described as a collection or 
set of sensitive personal data relating to U.S. persons, in any format, 
regardless of whether the data is anonymized, pseudonymized, de-
identified, or encrypted.
    Three commenters mistakenly noted that the definition of ``bulk 
U.S. sensitive personal data'' did not include a definition for 
``sensitive personal data'' or ``sensitivity'' and could, as a result, 
be interpreted too broadly to cover all data, not just sensitive data. 
As shown in the ANPRM and NPRM, the proposed rule already incorporated 
a separate definition of the term ``sensitive personal data'' in Sec.  
202.249, which is limited to the six categories of bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data. Furthermore, the definition of ``bulk,'' as provided in 
Sec.  202.205, incorporates this definition of ``sensitive personal 
data.'' Therefore, the term ``bulk U.S. sensitive personal data'' is 
appropriately scoped. However, another commenter recommended that the 
Department amend the definition of ``bulk U.S. sensitive personal 
data,'' which says, ``a collection or set of bulk data,'' to align with 
the characterization of the term in the part IV.A.13 of the NPRM, which 
says ``a collection or set of sensitive personal data.'' The Department 
agrees and has updated the definition of ``bulk U.S. sensitive personal 
data'' accordingly to ensure consistency, which should help further 
clarify the scope of bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. The Department 
has amended the definition of ``bulk U.S. sensitive personal data'' to 
read as follows: ``The term bulk U.S. sensitive personal data means a 
collection or set of sensitive personal data relating to U.S. persons, 
in any format, regardless of whether the data is anonymized, 
pseudonymized, de-identified, or encrypted, where such data meets or 
exceeds the applicable threshold set forth in Sec.  202.205.''
    One commenter asked for clarification on whether precise 
geolocation data and personal health data include de-identified data. 
The Department encourages this commenter to review Sec.  202.206. Three 
commenters suggested that the Department include definitions for the 
terms ``anonymized,'' ``pseudonymized,'' and/or ``de-identified.'' One 
such commenter recommended, in the context of the exemptions listed in 
Sec. Sec.  202.510 and 202.511, that the Department adopt a definition 
of ``de-identified'' that is consistent with the privacy protection 
standards required by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (``FDA'') 
as part of post-marketing adverse event reporting; namely, that the 
data be coded and not include individual names or addresses. The 
Department declines to adopt this suggestion. Such techniques evolve 
over time, and the final rule is intended to capture these developments 
and remain technology neutral. As one of the above commenters admitted, 
these are terms that are not universally understood to mean the same 
things. More broadly, these terms in the definition are meant to 
capture any claimed method for or attempt at anonymizing, 
pseudonymizing, or de-identifying sensitive personal data. As explained 
below in this part of the preamble, by including any attempt at 
anonymizing, pseudonymizing, or de-identifying sensitive personal data 
within the scope of ``sensitive personal data'' but then authorizing 
restricted transactions that comply with the methods of anonymization, 
pseudonymization, and de-identification laid out in CISA's security 
requirements to the extent such methods are sufficient to fully and 
effectively prevent access to covered data that is linked or 
identifiable (or unencrypted or decryptable), the rule promotes 
effective methods while prohibiting ineffective methods. No change to 
this rule thus appears necessary.
    Several commenters suggested that the Department modify the 
definition of ``bulk U.S. sensitive personal data'' to exclude data 
that is anonymized, pseudonymized, or de-identified ``in compliance 
with internationally recognized industry standards.'' These commenters 
suggested that such an approach would be appropriate where the link 
between the identifying dataset and the individual has been removed, 
where the data has been de-identified pursuant to HIPAA ``expert 
determination'' de-identification methods, or where the data has been 
``reasonably deidentified where a data controller has taken a clearly 
defined risk-based approach.'' Many of these commenters argued that it 
is difficult to tie anonymous or de-identified personal information to 
an individual or an individual's device and that such information is 
therefore not sensitive personal data. One commenter noted that 
effective de-identification, consistent with clear standards, has 
proven protective of individual privacy interests and is critical for 
research that leads to medical advancements. Another commenter argued 
that the Department's cited studies did not offer definitive evidence 
that re-identification of truly anonymized data is a real risk, but the 
commenter provided no evidence to contradict the cited studies or to 
support their conclusion. Another commenter said that control measures 
for anonymized, pseudonymized, and de-identified data should be 
different than control measures for unprocessed original data. Finally, 
one commenter noted that the Department should instead direct DHS to 
identify standards for de-identifying and anonymizing data that meet 
certain requirements.
    Other commenters suggested that the definitions of government-
related data also exclude data that is subject to robust encryption 
measures, including, but not limited to, data protected via post-
quantum cryptography algorithms approved by the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (``NIST'') to withstand quantum computer 
attacks. A few commenters opposed the inclusion of encrypted data based 
on the proposed CISA security requirements relating to data 
minimization and data masking strategies for restricted transactions. 
One commenter noted that the inclusion of encrypted data does not 
represent a carefully calibrated action and would curtail the 
usefulness of privacy-enhancing technologies (even though some of these 
were explicitly included in the proposed CISA security requirements). 
This same commenter stated, without providing any support, that 
quantum-computing capabilities that could be used to decipher encrypted 
data are too far from being operational to decrypt bulk data. Another 
commenter noted that adopting an exemption for these algorithms would 
incentivize better encryption and promote post-quantum cryptography 
adoption.
    The Department declines to alter the approach in the NPRM. These 
comments inaccurately suggest that this rule would treat anonymized, 
pseudonymized, de-identified, and encrypted data the same as 
unprocessed data. The rule does not prohibit all covered data 
transactions with countries of concern or covered persons whenever the 
sensitive personal data is anonymized, pseudonymized, de-identified, or 
encrypted. Instead, the rule includes such data within the scope of 
sensitive personal data and then authorizes the three categories of 
restricted transactions as long as they meet CISA's security 
requirements, which include data-level requirements that allow 
transactions to proceed with sufficiently effective techniques to 
accomplish data minimization and

[[Page 1658]]

masking, encryption, and/or privacy-enhancing technologies, and 
otherwise comply with the rule's other applicable requirements. For 
example, depending on the other circumstances of the restricted 
transaction, including the findings of the relevant internal risk 
assessment conducted in accordance with CISA's security requirements, 
the use of NIST-approved post-quantum cryptography algorithms would 
appear to satisfy the data-level requirement of applying comprehensive 
encryption techniques during transit and storage, as described in the 
CISA security requirements.
    The rule's effect is therefore to strike a balance by allowing 
employment, vendor, and investment agreements with countries of concern 
or covered persons that use the robust anonymization, encryption, and/
or other data-level requirements specified by CISA's security 
requirements along with organizational and system-level requirements, 
which are derived from the existing and commonly used security 
standards for securing data. At the same time, the rule does not allow 
transactions if they involve access by a covered person or country of 
concern to unprocessed sensitive personal data or insufficient 
anonymization, encryption, or other data-level requirements that do not 
meet CISA's security requirements.
    This approach allows for restricted transactions to move forward, 
while setting a floor for the security applied to the underlying 
government-related data and bulk U.S. sensitive personal data in these 
transactions. As CISA explains, the final security requirements permit 
organizations to conduct restricted transactions by applying a 
sufficient combination of data-level techniques (such as 
pseudonymization, de-identification, aggregation, and/or encryption, as 
outlined in the security requirements) that either allow access to an 
appropriately mitigated version of the data or directly deny countries 
of concern and covered persons access to the data itself, in 
conjunction with implementing the organizational and system level 
requirements.
    This approach is consistent with the NPRM's explanation that access 
to weakly anonymized, pseudonymized, encrypted, or de-identified data 
presents similar national security risks as access to the unprocessed 
or identifiable sensitive personal data. As the NPRM explained, 
countries of concern are attempting to access and exploit anonymized, 
pseudonymized, de-identified, and encrypted data (including to identify 
individuals). The NPRM also explained at length, using representative 
studies and open-source examples, how not all forms of anonymization, 
pseudonymization, de-identification, and encryption provide sufficient 
protection from re-identification. These comments do not address the 
NPRM's explanation, do not provide any contrary evidence, and merely 
state a desired conclusion. The NPRM's approach allows the Department 
to strike an appropriate balance between ensuring that restricted 
transactions can continue given their greater economic value and 
ensuring that there are robust safeguards in place to protect this 
data.
    As a result, the rule's approach, coupled with CISA's security 
requirements, is designed to encourage the adoption of sufficiently 
effective methods of encryption, aggregation, and/or other privacy-
preserving technologies. One of the data-level requirements available 
in the security requirements is to encrypt the data ``during transit 
and storage'' using comprehensive encryption, with secure management of 
the cryptographic key. As the security requirements explain, United 
States Government-approved encryption algorithms, ciphers, and 
protocols--including any United States Government-approved standards 
for quantum-resistant public-key cryptographic algorithms--are 
considered comprehensive encryption.
    While post-quantum cryptography could be part of a sufficient 
combination of data-level requirements under the security requirements 
to allow a restricted transaction to go forward (so long as such 
encryption qualifies as comprehensive encryption), the Department 
declines to entirely exempt restricted transactions that implement a 
particular level of encryption. As the NPRM explained, the use of a 
strong cryptographic method is one tool to mitigate the risk of access 
to data. But as the security requirements make clear, encryption by 
itself is not a panacea. Encryption is not sufficient on its own to 
adequately mitigate the risk of access by a country of concern or 
covered person. Instead, even robust encryption must be accompanied by 
other measures to be effective in mitigating the risk of access. For 
example, comprehensive encryption must be accompanied by secure 
cryptographic key management (such as ensuring that the key is not co-
located with the data and that covered persons and countries of concern 
do not have access to the key). Similarly, encryption must be 
implemented with the organizational- and system-level requirements to 
ensure that encryption is implemented effectively, for example, by 
treating the systems responsible for the storage of and access to 
encryption keys as being subject to organizational- and system-level 
controls that mitigate the risk that a covered person is able to access 
the keys to decrypt the data. And the use of even post-quantum 
cryptography does not eliminate the need to perform due diligence, 
audit compliance with the security requirements, and keep records. As a 
result, the Department declines to exempt restricted transactions 
merely because they use industry-standard encryption.
    Finally, the rule offers a host of exemptions related to health 
research, including exemptions for federally funded research, certain 
clinical trials, and sharing of this data pursuant to international 
agreements such as certain pandemic surveillance agreements. The rule 
also authorizes the Department to issue general and specific licenses 
as necessary and appropriate.
13. Section 202.205--Bulk
    The NPRM proposed applying the proposed rule's prohibitions and 
restrictions to bulk amounts of U.S. sensitive personal data (in 
addition to the separate category of government-related data). The 
proposed rule defined ``bulk'' as any amount of such data that meets or 
exceeds thresholds during a given 12-month period, whether through one 
covered data transaction or multiple covered data transactions 
involving the same U.S. person and the same foreign person or covered 
person.
    The Department proposed volume-based thresholds for each category 
of sensitive personal data and for combined datasets. See Sec.  
202.205. The bulk thresholds are based on a risk-based assessment that 
accounts for the characteristics of datasets that affect the data's 
vulnerability to exploitation by countries of concern and that affect 
the consequences of exploitation.
    In the ANPRM, the Department previewed ranges within which each of 
the bulk thresholds would be selected, relying on orders-of-magnitude 
differences to develop preliminary judgments.\90\ The Department sought 
input on the thresholds from the public in response to the ANPRM. While 
commenters expressed varying views (including that the potential 
thresholds were too high or too low, should be zero, or should be 
eliminated entirely), these comments merely stated their preferred 
numbers.\91\ None of the comments provided actionable data points, use 
cases, or evidence that would support an alternative analytical 
framework or support adopting one

[[Page 1659]]

particular threshold over another. Given this lack of specificity, the 
Department (along with the Department of Commerce) followed up 
individually with each commenter on this topic to seek any additional 
information available, but those engagements did not yield any 
materially new qualitative or quantitative information to reliably 
inform the selection of the bulk thresholds.\92\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \90\ 89 FR 15786.
    \91\ 89 FR 86164.
    \92\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    In the NPRM, the Department proposed thresholds within the ranges 
previewed in the ANPRM and set forth the relevant analysis, including 
the methodology and risk-based assessment for each category of 
sensitive personal data.\93\ As part of that analysis, the NPRM 
examined whether potential unintended economic impacts from the choice 
of specific thresholds should justify deviating from the risk-based 
analysis and determined that it should not be based on available 
information. As the NPRM explained, neither the Department nor 
commenters identified actionable data or analysis suggesting that the 
specific choice of thresholds above zero is reasonably likely to result 
in unintended and unanticipated downstream impacts, and thus it did not 
appear to make a difference whether a threshold is, for example, 100 
versus 1,000. The NPRM also explained that it seems unlikely that any 
such data or analysis exists that would be detailed and representative 
enough to reasonably affect the choice of any specific thresholds above 
zero, and there is no known, reliable, sufficiently representative 
qualitative or quantitative data sufficient to conclude that a choice 
between potential thresholds would meaningfully affect the number of 
transactions subject to the regulations or the cost of compliance. As 
at the ANPRM stage, while commenters once again expressed varying views 
and stated their preferred thresholds in response to the NPRM, none of 
the comments provided actionable data points, use cases, or evidence 
that would support an alternative analytical framework or support 
adopting one particular threshold over another. The Department of 
Justice (along with the Department of Commerce) once again followed up 
individually with commenters on this topic to seek any additional 
information, but those engagements did not yield any materially new 
qualitative or quantitative information to reliably inform the 
selection of the bulk thresholds.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \93\ 89 FR 86164-65.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    No commenter opposed the risk-based framework and analysis that the 
NPRM laid out to determine the bulk thresholds, such as by suggesting 
an alternative methodology. Other than bare assertions of policy 
preferences about the thresholds, the comments addressed only discrete 
issues with respect to the thresholds.
    The rule therefore adopts the bulk thresholds as proposed in the 
NPRM. The bulk thresholds analysis in the NPRM necessarily focused on 
orders of magnitude and set ratios based on the relative sensitivity of 
the six types of sensitive personal data. On the risk side, order of 
magnitude is the most granular level of reliable analysis given current 
experience and available information. Research makes clear, for 
example, that a relatively small amount of sensitive personal data can 
be used to extrapolate insights about a population that is orders of 
magnitude larger. By using basic statistical inference techniques, a 
sample size need not exceed 10 percent in order to draw conclusions 
about an entire population. As discussed above in this part of the 
preamble, fairly small sample sizes of Americans may allow for 
inferences on much larger segments of the U.S. population.\94\ And 
although the Department considered whether this risk-based setting of 
ratios should be altered to account for potential unintended economic 
impacts, there is no sufficiently granular information or analysis 
about the types and volumes of data involved in the categories of 
regulated transactions to reliably inform a choice between any 
particular thresholds even at the level of generality of orders of 
magnitude. Based on the limits of currently available information, 
analyzing and setting the bulk thresholds at a level more granular than 
orders of magnitude is too speculative to form the basis for a policy 
decision.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \94\ Sandip Sinharay, An Overview of Statistics in Education, in 
International Encyclopedia of Education (Penelope Peterson et al. 
eds., 3d ed. 2010).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Some commenters asserted that the thresholds for human genomic data 
are too low and will hinder normal academic, scientific, and 
technological exchanges. The Department declines to change these 
thresholds. As articulated in the NPRM, the thresholds for human 
genomic data are correlated to the sensitivity of that data and the 
national security risk when such data is exploited by a country of 
concern, such as the commenter. The 2024 National Counterintelligence 
Strategy explains that, ``as part of a broader focus on data as a 
strategic resource, our adversaries are interested in personally 
identifiable information (PII) about U.S. citizens and others, such as 
biometric and genomic data'' and ``health care data.'' \95\ ODNI has 
explained, for example, that China has gone to great lengths to obtain 
Americans' human genomic data, such as trying ``to leverage access 
through its relationships with Chinese companies, strategic investments 
in foreign companies, and by purchasing large data sets.'' \96\ China 
and Chinese companies ``have sought to acquire sensitive health and 
genomic data on U.S. persons through, for example, investment in U.S. 
firms that handle such data or by partnering with healthcare or 
research organizations in the United States to provide genomic 
sequencing services.'' \97\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \95\ Nat'l Counterintel. & Sec. Ctr., supra note 6, at 13.
    \96\ In Camera, Ex Parte Classified Decl. of Casey Blackburn, 
Assistant Dir. of Nat'l Intel., Doc. No. 2066897 at Gov't App. 11 ] 
31, TikTok Inc. v. Garland, Case Nos. 24-1113, 24-1130, 24-1183 
(D.C. Cir. July 26, 2024) (publicly filed redacted version) 
(hereinafter ``Blackburn Decl.'').
    \97\ Id. at Gov't App. 11 ] 33(a).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Additionally, no evidence has been provided that the rule would 
hinder beneficial academic, scientific, and technological research in 
light of the examples and exemptions in the rule. As explained in parts 
IV.B.2 and IV.D.9 of this preamble, the rule does not prohibit or 
restrict U.S. research in countries of concern, or research 
partnerships or collaborations with countries of concern or covered 
persons, that do not involve a prohibited or restricted commercial 
transaction. The rule contains exemptions meant to preserve critical 
health research, including the exemptions for federally funded 
research, for sharing data pursuant to international agreements 
(including certain pandemic-related and global-health-surveillance 
agreements), for submissions of regulatory approval data for medical 
drugs, devices, and biological products, and for certain clinical-
investigation data and post-marketing surveillance data. Finally, as 
articulated in the NPRM, the rule contemplates a process through which 
the Department can issue general or specific licenses as necessary and 
appropriate to authorize regulated activities in certain circumstances.
    One commenter requested that the Department delete Sec.  
202.205(c), which sets the bulk threshold for precise geolocation data 
at more than 1,000 U.S. devices. As justification, the commenter argued 
that Sec.  202.222's Government-Related Location Data List identifies 
precise geographic areas, but that Sec.  202.205(c)'s bulk threshold on 
precise

[[Page 1660]]

geolocation data is somehow a double limit. This comment, which is 
unclear, seems to confuse several different elements of the rule: the 
Government-Related Location Data List in Sec.  202.1401, the 1,000-
meter precision required in the definition of ``precise geolocation 
data'' in Sec.  202.242, and the bulk threshold of 1,000 U.S. devices 
in Sec.  202.205(c). Geographic or location data must first be precise 
enough (within 1,000 meters) to meet the definition of ``precise 
geolocation data'' in Sec.  202.242. If it is, then the question is 
whether that precise geolocation data provides a location within one of 
the areas on the Government-Related Location Data List in Sec.  
202.1401. If so, then the data is government-related data, and the bulk 
threshold of 1,000 U.S. devices in Sec.  202.205(c) does not apply. If 
not, then the data qualifies as bulk U.S. sensitive personal data only 
if it exceeds the bulk threshold of 1,000 U.S. devices in Sec.  
202.205(c). As such, the Department declines to make any change in 
response to this comment.
    Several commenters encouraged the Department to review and adjust 
the bulk thresholds over time to reflect changes to technology and 
asked how the Department might change the thresholds in the future. One 
commenter sought clarification regarding the benefits of setting static 
thresholds for technological uses that may vary widely and change 
rapidly. The commenter was concerned that new discoveries, particularly 
from AI models, could change the United States Government's risk 
tolerance and justify changing the thresholds. The Department intends 
to monitor evolving technological developments and national security 
threats to ensure that the thresholds remain responsive to the risks. 
Changes to the bulk thresholds could be accomplished through additional 
rulemakings.
    One commenter asserted that the proposed rule did not detail how it 
arrived at the different bulk thresholds, aside from assessing human 
and machine-centric characteristics, and that an assessment should 
consider the effectiveness of the thresholds. The commenter did not 
specify what ``effectiveness'' would mean in this context. The same 
commenter noted that sophisticated actors would likely find ways to 
circumvent any thresholds, while at the same time asserting that higher 
thresholds for each category would help focus regulators, reduce the 
impact on trade and innovation, and make the program more manageable 
for the Department to enforce. The commenter did not provide evidence 
or analysis justifying these assertions.
    One commenter criticized the bulk thresholds as copying the PRC 
Government's approach to data restrictions and suggested eliminating 
them. There is no basis to analogize this rule to the PRC Government's 
regime. Consistent with the longstanding commitment of the United 
States to the trusted flow of data across borders, this rule's default 
is to allow data transactions except for targeted prohibitions and 
restrictions on engaging in certain types of commercial transactions 
involving sensitive personal data above the bulk thresholds where that 
trust is lacking. The bulk thresholds thus have the effect of exempting 
transactions with less data. By contrast, PRC law's default is to 
restrict data exports and require PRC Government review unless they 
fall below certain thresholds or meet certain exemptions. The 
superficial fact that both use a numerical threshold for entirely 
different purposes does not make one like the other.
    One commenter sought clarification on whether the bulk thresholds 
apply to individual legal entities or apply in total to data 
accumulated across subsidiaries or affiliated companies. They further 
sought guidance on the timeframe for calculating and implementing the 
bulk thresholds. The bulk thresholds apply to each entity that engages 
in a covered data transaction, regardless of whether the entity has a 
relationship to another entity, such as a parent and one of its 
subsidiaries. As stated in the definition, the bulk thresholds apply to 
any amount of sensitive personal data that meets the thresholds and 
that involves the same U.S. person and same foreign person or covered 
person. The rule defines the term ``U.S. person'' to include certain 
entities and, in turn, defines the term ``entity'' as ``a partnership, 
association, trust, joint venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or 
other organization.'' See Sec. Sec.  202.256 and 202.218.
    One commenter requested, without support or analysis, that the rule 
set the bulk threshold for personal financial data and covered personal 
identifiers at 1 million, and another requested that the Department set 
the threshold for personal financial data at 500,000. Both commenters 
requested that the Department remove the 12-month ``look-back'' period 
because, as one commenter explained, the proposed bulk threshold of 
10,000 is too low and the 12-month ``look-back'' period is too long. 
The commenter contended that many large financial institutions that 
conduct transactions with personal financial data will easily exceed 
the proposed threshold of 10,000, and thus will incur heavy compliance 
burdens to review every transaction to determine whether they are 
restricted. Combined with the 12-month ``look back'' requirement, this 
commenter noted that if an entity conducts just two transactions per 
month related to 450 U.S.-persons' financial data over a 12-month 
period, it would be engaging in a restricted transaction. The 
Department declines to revise the bulk thresholds for covered personal 
identifiers and personal financial data in response to these comments. 
As discussed in part IV.B of this preamble, the bulk thresholds are set 
based on a risk-based assessment that accounts for the characteristics 
of the different categories of sensitive personal data that affect the 
data's vulnerability to exploitation by countries of concern, as well 
as the consequences of that exploitation. These commenters did not 
offer any analysis or evidence about the compliance burdens on 
financial institutions, nor did they explain the kinds and volume of 
non-exempt covered data transactions that these institutions would be 
engaged in (especially in light of the financial services exemption 
that likely covers most of those institutions' global data activities).
    In addition, while these two commenters considered the impact of 
the thresholds only in terms of compliance burdens for a single 
financial institution, the Department must also consider the impact of 
the thresholds collectively. The Department believes that, with respect 
to addressing the national security risk, the thresholds should be 
primarily examined from the perspective of the access provided to 
countries of concern and covered persons across all covered data 
transactions, rather than from the perspective of a single U.S. 
person's transactions with a single foreign person. If the thresholds 
are higher, countries of concern will be able to obtain unrestricted 
access to significantly larger amounts of bulk U.S. sensitive data 
across thousands, and potentially tens of thousands, of transactions. 
For example, if 50 U.S. persons each give the same covered person 
access to genomic data on 99 U.S. persons--a seemingly small number--
then a country of concern would be able to potentially obtain 
unrestricted access to genomic data on nearly 5,000 U.S. persons. And 
as explained above in this part, the data on those 5,000 U.S. persons 
could be reasonably used to identify individuals or extrapolate 
insights about a population that are orders of magnitude

[[Page 1661]]

larger by using basic statistical inference techniques.\98\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \98\ Sinharay, supra note 94.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    To put this into perspective, raising the bulk threshold for 
covered personal identifiers by one order of magnitude to 1 million 
U.S. persons would allow a country of concern government to buy the 
passport numbers and Social Security numbers of every U.S. person who 
lives in the city of San Francisco from a U.S. company--and buy from 
other U.S. companies the same data for every U.S. person in Detroit, 
Washington, DC, Las Vegas, Jacksonville, and so on. Similarly, raising 
the bulk threshold for personal health data and personal financial data 
by one order of magnitude to 100,000 U.S. persons would allow U.S. 
companies to store the treatments and test results, financial 
transactions, and debts and assets of every U.S. person who works for 
T-Mobile, Ford, Citigroup, McDonald's, and General Motors in a data 
center operated by a country of concern state-owned enterprise with 
zero security precautions to mitigate the risk of access to that data. 
Those examples illustrate the unacceptable national security risks that 
would result from significantly raising the thresholds and allowing a 
country of concern to readily assemble and exploit a structured set of 
pattern-of-life data that is representative of the American population.
    For these reasons, the Department must prioritize the cumulative 
national security impacts of transactions across the various data 
categories over the compliance burdens of individual entities, 
especially when no meaningful evidence or analysis has been presented 
on the latter topic. The Department therefore adopts the proposed bulk 
thresholds without change.
14. Section 202.222--Government-Related Data
    The proposed rule defined subcategories of government-related data 
for locations and personnel, and it did not propose imposing any bulk 
threshold requirements on transactions involving government-related 
data.
    For the location subcategory, the NPRM proposed defining 
``government-related data'' as any precise geolocation data, regardless 
of volume, for any location within any area enumerated on the 
Government-Related Location Data List in Sec.  202.1401 which the 
Attorney General has determined poses a heightened risk of being 
exploited by a country of concern to reveal insights to the detriment 
of national security about locations controlled by the Federal 
Government, including insights about facilities, activities, or 
populations in those locations, because of the nature of those 
locations or the personnel who work there. The proposed rule listed 
specific locations on the Government-Related Location Data List, and 
anticipated including additional locations in the final rule. The final 
rule includes an expanded list of locations that meet the criteria in 
Sec.  202.222(a)(1). See Sec.  202.1401. These additional locations 
consist of commonly known Department of Defense sites, installations, 
such as bases, camps, posts, stations, yards, centers, or homeport 
facilities for any ship, ranges, and training areas in the United 
States and its territories. These locations are controlled by the 
Federal Government, as they encompass land which is federally owned or 
otherwise federally managed. This initial list does not necessarily 
represent a comprehensive collection of all locations that meet the 
criteria for inclusion on the Government-Related Location Data List. 
The Department, in consultation with other agencies, will continue to 
consider adding additional locations to the list, which may include, 
for example, U.S. embassies and consulates, certain Federal department 
and agency headquarters locations, and other facilities or locations 
that otherwise support the Federal Government's national security, 
defense, intelligence, law enforcement, or foreign policy missions.
    For the personnel subcategory, the NPRM proposed defining 
``government-related data'' as any sensitive personal data, regardless 
of volume, that a transacting party markets as linked or linkable to 
current or recent former employees or contractors, or former senior 
officials, of the United States Government, including the military and 
intelligence community.\99\ The Department also sought public input on 
a suggestion raised by a commenter that the proposed definition remove 
the qualifier that data had to be ``marketed'' as data about members of 
the military or intelligence community because certain data can still 
be ``linked or linkable'' to members of the military through 
geolocation without being explicitly marketed as such. The Department 
did not receive any public input on this question.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \99\ 89 FR 86129.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter sought to ensure that, similar to sensitive personal 
data, the definition of ``government-related data'' excludes publicly 
available data. The Department appreciates the need to ensure that the 
definitions of sensitive personal data and government-related data both 
exclude publicly available data, and it has revised the definition of 
``sensitive personal data'' in Sec.  202.249 to clarify that each 
category of sensitive personal data--including precise geolocation 
data, which is a key part of the government-related data definition--
excludes publicly available data.
    One commenter stated that the defined term ``precise geolocation 
data'' is unclear but did not say why. Another commenter, who was 
supportive of the inclusion of a publicly available list of government-
related locations, recommended that the list be made available in 
formats that allow companies to automate and streamline compliance. 
Although no change is needed to the rule, the Department supports 
automating and streamlining compliance and intends to pursue this 
suggestion as part of publicly maintaining this list of latitude and 
longitude coordinates of the geofenced areas.
    One commenter asserted that the personnel category is extremely 
broad, open-ended, and could apply to large sections of the U.S. 
population. The commenter requested that the Department set a clear and 
high threshold for seniority in order to only capture the most 
important government officials, noting that a key issue for many 
organizations is that they have mixed data sets containing sensitive 
data on government officials along with data on civilians.
    The Department declines to set thresholds or revise the seniority 
levels for government-related data. To start, as the Department 
explained in the NPRM, the Department has defined the personnel 
subcategory based on how the U.S. person markets the data, not based on 
whether a particular dataset contains data on former government 
employees or contractors. In other words, the personnel subcategory 
applies only to transactions in which the U.S. person has already 
identified and described sensitive personal data as being about certain 
government personnel. This subcategory does not apply based merely on 
the presence or absence of data linked to certain government personnel 
in the underlying sensitive personal data. The comment therefore 
appears premised on a mistaken assertion about how the personnel 
subcategory is defined. Furthermore, because the Order sets forth the 
personnel categories as ``current or recent former employees or 
contractors, or former senior officials, of the Federal

[[Page 1662]]

Government,'' \100\ the Department does not have discretion to change 
them. Even if it did, the risks associated with countries of concern or 
covered persons obtaining government-related data are not confined to 
the most senior government personnel, as the NPRM discussed.\101\ The 
risk of countries of concern and covered persons identifying and 
recruiting United States Government personnel, for example, are not 
limited to the most senior government personnel,\102\ and access to 
sensitive personal data can facilitate the identification of 
individuals for this type of recruitment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \100\ 89 FR 15429.
    \101\ See, e.g., 89 FR 86118.
    \102\ Press Release, U.S. Dep't of Just., Former CIA Officer 
Sentenced to 10 Years in Prison for Conspiracy to Commit Espionage 
(Sept. 11, 2024), https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/former-cia-officer-sentenced-10-years-prison-conspiracy-commit-espionage [https://perma.cc/F9UG-AANZ]; Press Release, U.S. Dep't of Just., U.S. Army 
Intel. Analyst Pleads Guilty to Charges of Conspiracy to Obtain and 
Disclose National Defense Information, Export Control Violations and 
Bribery (Aug. 13, 2024), https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/us-army-intelligence-analyst-pleads-guilty-charges-conspiracy-obtain-and-disclose-national [https://perma.cc/8MGA-7FWS].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter suggested several changes to the definition of 
``government-related data'' in Sec.  202.222. First, the commenter 
argued that the language of Sec.  202.222(a)(1)(iii) (``Facilities or 
locations that otherwise support the Federal Government's national 
security, defense, intelligence, law enforcement, or foreign policy 
missions'') was too vague and impractical. Second, the commenter 
recommended removing ``recent former employees or contractors'' from 
the definition in Sec.  202.222(a)(2), arguing that former employees 
and suppliers are not confidential and that the prohibition would 
affect the normal production and ``personal life'' of the relevant 
organizations. Third, the commenter suggested deleting ``military 
personnel who like to read'' from Example 1, as written in Sec.  
202.222(b), arguing that this description is a subjective judgment.
    The Department declines to adopt these recommendations. Federal 
agencies have identified within the list at the end of the rule the 
locations that these agencies want subject to the prohibition on sale 
of precise geolocation data. The Government-Related Location Data List 
is thus designed to preserve the confidentiality of the activities, 
personnel, and facilities in those locations, which geolocation data in 
those locations could be used to reveal. ``Facilities or locations that 
otherwise support the Federal Government's national security, defense, 
intelligence, law enforcement, or foreign policy missions'' is meant to 
demonstrate the types of facilities included on the precise geolocation 
list. Regarding the inclusion of former employees and contractors, 
Section 7(m)(i) of the Order defines the personnel subcategory of 
government-related data marketed as linked or linkable ``to categories 
of current or recent former employees or contractors, or former senior 
officials, of the Federal Government.'' As such, the Department has no 
discretion to remove this subcategory from the scope of the rule. 
Further, the rule is intended to protect both current and recent former 
employees and contractors because former United States Government 
employees are still a desirable target for coercion and blackmail, 
based on their potential insider knowledge of United States Government 
facilities, operations, and other details, as well as on their 
potential to pick up new contract work to gain access to new data in 
which a foreign adversary may have interest. Finally, the language from 
the example is meant to demonstrate how the rule works in reality. 
Focusing on whether the transacting party's characterization of a 
dataset is subjective is irrelevant to whether the transacting party 
has marketed the data as linked or linkable to current or recent former 
employees or contractors, or former senior officials, of the United 
States Government, including the military and Intelligence Community.
15. Section 202.302--Other Prohibited Data-Brokerage Transactions 
Involving Potential Onward Transfer to Countries of Concern or Covered 
Persons
    The proposed rule included a prohibition specific to data brokerage 
to address transactions involving the onward transfer or resale of 
government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data to 
countries of concern and covered persons.\103\ The NPRM proposed 
prohibiting any U.S. person from knowingly engaging in a covered data 
transaction involving data brokerage with any foreign person that is 
not a covered person unless the U.S. person contractually requires that 
the foreign person refrain from engaging in a subsequent covered data 
transaction involving that data with a country of concern or covered 
person. The proposed rule also included a requirement for U.S. persons 
engaging in such transactions to report any known or suspected 
violations of the required contractual provision. This requirement 
would create a mechanism to provide the necessary information for the 
Department to investigate and take appropriate action to address any 
violations of the proposed rule.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \103\ 89 FR 86130.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    A few commenters asserted that this provision imposes ambiguous 
requirements on U.S. persons engaging in covered data transactions. 
They stated that it is unclear how entities should evaluate whether 
foreign persons are complying with the contracts, and asked that the 
Department explicitly describe the due diligence requirements for U.S. 
entities to comply with Sec.  202.302. Regarding the reporting 
requirement, one commenter asked that the Department exclude 
inadvertent, good faith, or de minimis violations of the contracts. 
Another commenter argued that the use of contractual language to 
prevent the onward transfer of data to countries of concern or covered 
persons was a significant step, but emphasized that some countries or 
entities might find alternative means to transfer data and recommended 
that the Department extensively track and monitor compliance. Another 
commenter asked that the Department provide standard contractual 
clauses that meet the Department's expectations about contractual 
requirements.
    The Department declines to prescribe specific due diligence 
requirements for compliance with Sec.  202.302, because overly 
prescriptive requirements will not fit the risk profile or operations 
of all U.S. persons. As the Department discussed in detail in the NPRM, 
the Department expects that U.S. persons will develop compliance 
programs that fit their own individualized risk profiles depending on a 
variety of factors. At a minimum, however, U.S. persons must conduct 
sufficient due diligence to be able to comply with the reporting 
requirements, which could include periodic reviews with foreign 
counterparties to ensure that they have complied with the contract. The 
Department anticipates issuing general compliance guidance, which may 
include sample contractual clauses and suggest potential ways to track 
and monitor compliance.
    Regarding excepting de minimis, good faith, or inadvertent contract 
violations, without a specific example, the Department cannot envision 
what such violations of the requirement would be. Specifically, Sec.  
202.302 requires that a U.S. person report when a foreign person has 
engaged in a covered data transaction--that is, a transaction that 
involves access by a country of concern or covered person to any 
government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. Any 
violation of this contractual term gives a country of concern or 
covered person access to

[[Page 1663]]

sensitive personal data and is inherently not de minimis. Moreover, the 
reporting requirement does not require that U.S. persons report 
contractual violations unrelated to this provision, such as a foreign 
person missing a reporting requirement by a few days or other minor 
contractual provisions. Because of the nature of national security 
risks, even good-faith or inadvertent violations of the contractual 
provision may still result in harm to U.S. national security by 
enabling access by a country of concern or covered person to 
government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data through 
data brokerage. For those reasons, the Department declines to modify 
the reporting requirement to account for de minimis, good faith, or 
inadvertent contract violations.
    One commenter suggested that the provision apply only when a U.S. 
person has actual knowledge that a foreign counterparty is repeatedly 
violating contractual provisions. Another commenter asked that the 
Department include the word ``knowingly'' before the term ``engaging'' 
(although the term already exists there), and another asked that the 
Department define the terms ``known or suspected [violations]'' and 
clarify the extent to which a U.S. person must know about a violation 
for the reporting requirement to be triggered.
    The rule's knowledge standard is addressed in detail in part 
IV.B.19 of this preamble. Section 202.230 defines ``knowingly'' to 
mean, with respect to conduct, circumstances, or a result, that the 
U.S. person had actual knowledge of, or reasonably should have known 
about, the conduct, circumstances, or result. To determine what an 
individual or entity reasonably should have known in the context of 
prohibited transactions, the Department will consider relevant facts 
and circumstances, including the sophistication of the individual or 
entity, the scale and sensitivity of the data involved, and the extent 
to which the parties to the transaction appeared to be aware. The 
Department declines to adopt an actual knowledge standard because the 
knowingly standard acknowledges the doctrine of willful blindness, a 
legal concept where a person intentionally avoids knowing about 
something illegal or wrong, even though they suspect it might be 
happening. For example, imagine that a U.S. entity is engaging in a 
covered data transaction involving data brokerage with a foreign person 
that is not a covered person and has contractually required that the 
foreign person refrain from engaging in a subsequent covered data 
transaction involving data brokerage of the same data with a country of 
concern or covered person. The U.S. entity suspects that the foreign 
person may not be complying with its contractual obligations, but 
instead of investigating, the U.S. entity deliberately ignores signs or 
evidence to maintain plausible deniability. Under the rule's 
``knowingly'' standard, this U.S. entity can, and should, still be 
responsible because it purposefully avoided the truth. In other words, 
the U.S. entity should have known about the violation of the 
contractual requirements, and taken steps to report it.
    Several commenters asked whether Sec.  202.302 would apply to 
contractual agreements signed before the rule's effective date. If so, 
they asked for sufficient time for companies to amend those agreements. 
As discussed in detail in part IV.A.1 of this preamble, the rule will 
apply to covered data transactions covered by the rule's prohibitions 
and restrictions that occur after the effective date of the rule, 
regardless of when U.S. persons signed those agreements. The Department 
is considering whether to issue a wind-down license that would allow 
the amendment of any existing agreements that were signed before the 
rule's effective date but that still allow for a country of concern or 
covered person to access bulk U.S. sensitive personal data or 
government related data after the rule becomes effective.
    In the final rule, the Department changed the text of this 
provision to account for the change to the definition of ``covered data 
transaction'' as described in part IV.B.1 of this preamble. That change 
limits the term ``covered data transaction'' to transactions involving 
access by a country of concern or covered person. Because transactions 
restricted by this section are definitionally not with a covered 
person, the Department made conforming edits to this provision as well. 
As with the edits to Sec.  202.301, the revision to Sec.  202.302 
clarifies that the provision applies only when the access is by a 
foreign person, and not in cases where a U.S. person is accessing data 
from a foreign person. Other than that clarification, these conforming 
edits do not change the scope of this provision from the proposed rule.
16. Section 202.303--Prohibited Human `Omic Data and Human Biospecimen 
Transactions
    The NPRM proposed prohibiting any U.S. person from knowingly 
engaging in any covered data transaction involving human genomic data 
that provides a country of concern or covered person with access to 
bulk U.S. sensitive personal data that consists of human genomic data 
or to human biospecimens from which such human genomic data could be 
derived, where the number of U.S. persons in the dataset is greater 
than the applicable bulk threshold at any point in the preceding 12 
months, whether in a single covered data transaction or aggregated 
across covered data transactions. This prohibition applied to any of 
the categories of covered data transactions that involve access to bulk 
human genomic data or to human biospecimens from which bulk human 
genomic data can be derived, even when the transactions involve an 
employment, investment, or vendor agreement. In other words, 
transactions falling within the scope of Sec.  202.303 are never 
treated as restricted transactions under the rule. As explained in part 
IV.B.9 of this preamble, the Department has determined to treat 
transactions involving three additional categories of human `omic data 
similarly to human genomic data and has made conforming edits to this 
section--specifically, changing the reference to ``human genomic data'' 
to ``human `omic data.''
    The proposed rule solicited comment on whether the Department 
should exclude transactions involving human biospecimens intended for 
direct medical use from the rule's prohibition on covered data 
transactions involving human genomic data and human biospecimens from 
which such human genomic data could be derived.\104\ Multiple 
commenters expressed their view that the rule should exclude from its 
definition of ``human biospecimens'' certain human biospecimens 
intended for direct medical use. Commenters explained that blood-, 
cell-, and plasma-derived therapeutic products; human organs for 
transplant; and blood and plasma for transfusions, in particular, 
provided lifesaving interventions for patients globally, and they 
highlighted the humanitarian interest of the United States in enabling 
the transfer of such products to care for patients in countries of 
concern. Commenters also explained the difficulty of deriving 
individual human genomic data from human biospecimens used in or 
processed by finished medical products. The Department agrees with the 
commenters. As such, the Department revised the definition of ``human 
biospecimens'' in Sec.  202.223 to clarify that the term does not 
include human biospecimens intended by the recipient of the human 
biospecimens solely for use in diagnosing, treating, or

[[Page 1664]]

preventing any disease or medical condition. The prohibition in Sec.  
202.303 on covered data transactions with countries of concern or 
covered persons involving access to bulk human genomic data or human 
biospecimens from which bulk human genomic data could be derived thus 
does not prohibit covered data transactions with countries of concern 
or covered persons involving human biospecimens intended for use by the 
recipient to diagnose, treat, or prevent any disease or medical 
condition. In light of this change, a separate exemption for direct 
medical use is not necessary.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \104\ 89 FR 86140.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter suggested that the rule permit sharing bulk amounts 
of human genomic data or human biospecimens from which such data could 
be derived with countries of concern or covered persons for genetic 
research where an individual's health or well-being is not at risk--
i.e., beyond the diagnosis, treatment, or prevention of a disease or 
medical condition. The Department declines to adopt an express 
exemption for data transactions involving human genomic data or human 
biospecimens from which such data could be derived for general research 
purposes. Significantly, the rule does not generally prohibit 
transactions involving access to such data when the recipient is not a 
covered person or country of concern. For example, citizens of a 
country of concern who primarily reside in a third country are 
generally not considered covered persons under the rule. Nor, contrary 
to some commenters' understanding, does the rule restrict access to 
publicly available datasets; such data is excluded from the definition 
of ``sensitive personal data.'' See Sec.  202.249(b)(2). The rule also 
includes important exemptions and is calibrated to permit U.S. persons 
to share bulk U.S. sensitive personal data, including human genomic 
data and human biospecimens from which such data could be derived, with 
countries of concern and covered persons to enable genetics-related 
research under some circumstances.
    For example, data transactions involving human genomic data or 
human biospecimens from which such data could be derived conducted 
pursuant to a Federal contract, grant, or agreement, or conducted by a 
Federal agency, are exempt from subparts C and D of the rule. See Sec.  
202.504. The rule also exempts from subparts C and D any data 
transactions to the extent that they are required or authorized by 
Federal law or pursuant to an international agreement to which the 
United States is a party, including specified agreements authorizing 
parties to share global health and pandemic preparedness-related data. 
See Sec.  202.507. The definition of ``covered data transactions'' 
subject to the prohibitions and restrictions of subparts C and D of the 
rule identifies specific categories of data transactions to which the 
restrictions and prohibitions apply, each of which requires a 
commercial nexus. See, e.g., Sec.  202.214 (``data brokerage'' defined 
as ``the sale of data, licensing of access to data, or similar 
commercial transactions involving the transfer of data''); Sec.  
202.217 (``employment agreement'' defined as ``any agreement or 
arrangement in which an individual . . . performs work or job functions 
directly for a person in exchange for payment or other 
consideration''); Sec.  202.228 (``investment agreement'' defined as 
``an agreement or arrangement in which any person, in exchange for 
payment or other consideration, obtains direct or indirect ownership 
interests or rights in relation to'' property or entities); and Sec.  
202.258 (``vendor agreement'' defined as ``any agreement or arrangement 
. . . in which any person provides goods or services to another person 
. . . in exchange for payment or other consideration''). In addition, 
Sec. Sec.  202.510 and 202.511 exempt certain data transactions with 
countries of concern and covered persons that are necessary to obtain 
or maintain regulatory approval or authorization to market a drug, 
biological product, device, or combination product; clinical 
investigations regulated by the FDA or clinical investigations to 
support applications to the FDA for marketing or research permits for 
certain products; and data transactions ordinarily incident to and part 
of collecting or processing clinical care data or post-marketing 
surveillance data to support or maintain authorization by the FDA.
    In light of the risk identified in the Order, the NPRM, and this 
preamble of countries of concern seeking to acquire, among other 
things, U.S. persons' genomic data,\105\ the Department declines to 
adopt a more express exemption for human genomics-related research. 
However, U.S. persons may seek to obtain a general or specific license 
pursuant to subpart H if they assess that the prohibitions or 
restrictions of subparts C and D would apply to specific covered data 
transactions related to human genomics research involving bulk human 
genomic data or human biospecimens from which such data could be 
derived with countries of concern or covered persons.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \105\ 89 FR 86118.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

17. Section 202.304--Prohibited Evasions, Attempts, Causing Violations, 
and Conspiracies
    The NPRM proposed prohibiting transactions that have the purpose of 
evading or avoiding the rule's prohibitions, or that cause a violation 
of or attempt to violate the rule's prohibitions. The NPRM also 
proposed prohibiting conspiracies formed to violate the rule's 
prohibitions. In response to ANPRM comments, the NPRM added new 
examples in Sec.  202.304(b) highlighting how these regulations would 
apply in certain scenarios where bulk U.S. sensitive personal data 
would be licensed or sold to support algorithmic development, including 
cases of evasion, or where sensitive personal data could be extracted 
from AI models. The example in Sec.  202.304(b)(5) involves a U.S. 
subsidiary of a company headquartered in a country of concern that 
licenses a derivative algorithm from a U.S. online gaming company for 
the purpose of allowing the country of concern parent entity to access 
bulk U.S. sensitive personal data from the training data contained in 
the algorithm. A commenter raised concerns as to whether the 
transaction described in the example has the purpose of evading the 
regulations if the U.S. person subsidiary was licensing an AI 
classifier that determines whether to advertise to an individual but 
that does not appear to disclose the sensitive personal data on which 
it was trained. The commenter recommended that the Department clarify 
that the prohibited behavior in the example was not licensing a model 
that was merely trained on bulk U.S. sensitive personal data for the 
purposes of conducting targeted advertising, but rather licensing a 
model that reveals the underlying bulk U.S. sensitive personal data 
upon which it was trained.
    As a general matter, the Department agrees that the core question 
is whether the AI classifier could reveal the underlying bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data on which it was trained. For example, if the AI 
classifier enabled the U.S. person to access the bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data on which the model was trained, such as bulk covered 
personal identifiers, then a licensing transaction intended to evade 
the rule's prohibitions by enabling the country of concern parent 
company to access such data could violate the rule. The Department has 
made revised the example in Sec.  202.304(b)(5) to clarify that point. 
The Department also agrees that licensing access to an AI classifier 
that

[[Page 1665]]

could not reveal bulk U.S. sensitive personal data on which it was 
trained does not violate the rule. Nor does mere access to an algorithm 
that was trained on bulk U.S. sensitive personal data, by itself, 
constitute access to the underlying data.
    One commenter noted that the example in Sec.  202.304(b)(5) 
inaccurately states that the licensed algorithm contains training data. 
The Department agrees and has struck the language ``contained in the 
algorithm'' from the example.
18. Section 202.215--Directing
    The proposed rule defined ``directing'' to mean that the U.S. 
person has any authority (individually or as part of a group) to make 
decisions on behalf of a foreign entity and exercises that authority. 
For example, a U.S. person would direct a transaction by exercising 
their authority to order, decide to engage, or approve a transaction 
that would be prohibited under these regulations if engaged in by a 
U.S. person.
    One commenter renewed their observation from the ANPRM that Sec.  
202.215 is too broad because it could capture situations where a U.S. 
service provider does not know or expect their services to be used as 
part of a covered data transaction. The Department declines to make any 
further changes to this section because the definition in Sec.  202.215 
and the related discussion in the NPRM sufficiently address the 
commenter's observations, and the commenter does not engage with the 
NPRM's explanation.\106\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \106\ 89 FR 86132.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

19. Section 202.230--Knowingly
    The proposed rule defined ``knowingly'' to mean, with respect to 
conduct, a circumstance, or a result, that the U.S. person had actual 
knowledge of, or reasonably should have known about, the conduct, 
circumstance, or result. To determine what an individual or entity 
reasonably should have known in the context of prohibited or restricted 
transactions, the Department stated that it would take into account the 
relevant facts and circumstances, including the relative sophistication 
of the individual or entity at issue, the scale and sensitivity of the 
data involved, and the extent to which the parties to the transaction 
at issue appear to have been aware of and sought to evade the 
application of the proposed rule. As a result of this knowledge 
standard, the regulations incorporating the word ``knowingly'' do not 
adopt a strict liability standard.
    The Department's decision to adopt a knowingly standard--as opposed 
to adopting a strict liability standard, which is much more common for 
IEEPA-based regimes (e.g., OFAC-administered economic sanctions)--
reflects the Department's reasoned and balanced approach to mitigating 
the national security risks described in the Order while taking into 
consideration the views and concerns of the regulated community. This 
single, significant decision by the Department sufficiently addresses 
the source of many of the concerns and observations raised in the 
comments of this section. With respect to the regulations incorporating 
this standard, U.S. persons are not responsible for conduct, 
circumstances, or results that they could not reasonably have known 
about.
    The Department received comments that involved themes or issues 
that were previously raised and addressed. The Department directs those 
commenters to relevant discussions in the NPRM. Some comments lacked 
sufficient factual specificity and were premised on imprecise 
hypotheticals or generalizations such that it would be unreasonable for 
the Department to rely on them to make changes to the regulations. Most 
of these commenters advocated for such sweeping exceptions or 
amendments to the knowingly standard that, if adopted, would swallow 
most of the prohibitions and restrictions set forth in the regulations. 
Such an outcome would not only be at odds with the national security 
imperatives of the Order but would challenge even a common 
understanding of what the word ``knowledge'' means. As such, the 
Department declines to change or amend the standard. The Department 
continues addressing the relevant comments it received in the 
continuing discussion.
    Nearly all commenters on this provision expressed concern with the 
``reasonably should have known'' portion of the standard. The comments 
seemingly encourage the Department to consent to potentially 
unreasonable behavior by the regulated community that would be at odds 
with the national security risks identified in the Order. Commenters 
argued that ``reasonably should have known'' is susceptible to 
subjective judgment and hindsight and that the appropriate response to 
this supposed concern would be to further elevate the standard to 
``actual knowledge,'' thereby insulating from liability willfully 
blind, grossly reckless, or unreasonable actors. These commenters 
suggested that a U.S. person should not be liable for violating the 
regulations absent proof of actual knowledge, even if the Department 
has strong evidence demonstrating that the U.S. person reasonably 
should have known about, prevented, mitigated, or addressed the 
violative conduct. Some commenters requested ``safe harbors'' as an 
alternative to striking or removing the ``reasonably should have 
known'' language, effectively accomplishing the same outcome if 
adopted.
    The Department declines to make the requested changes. The existing 
standard provides the necessary flexibility to address national 
security risks while differentiating responsibilities based on the 
activities, roles, and characteristics of particular entities and 
individuals in data transactions. The knowingly standard is already a 
sufficiently elevated standard (compared to the strict liability 
standard in other IEEPA-based programs) designed to account for the 
nature, scope, breadth, volume, and ubiquity of data transactions and 
the variations in the parties or industries that engage in them. The 
existing standard also ensures that the Department can discourage, 
prevent, investigate, and punish conduct that is willfully blind, 
reckless, or unreasonable in light of the facts and circumstances that 
give rise to the matter.
    The Department also declines to create a safe harbor for due 
diligence practices at this time. It is possible that as best practices 
develop over time after the program's effective date, some kind of safe 
harbor could be included in the regulations. However, at this time, a 
safe harbor would be premature because there are a wide range of 
practices in use across multiple industries that may have valuable 
applications to meeting the requirements of these rules. The Department 
also notes that after the effective date of the regulations, the 
Department will be able to entertain and consider detailed license 
applications and requests for advisory opinions on these and other 
issues from the commenters and the broader public.
    One commenter noted that mitigating risks around the reproduction 
or disclosure of sensitive data for training AI models is an area of 
active study and that any current regulation would impede the ability 
of U.S. companies to deploy AI models. This commenter also suggested 
that the regulations include an actual knowledge standard for 
transactions involving AI, that U.S. persons not be required to 
actively conduct due diligence on data transactions with foreign 
persons to determine whether they are covered persons,: that an actual, 
rather than constructive, knowledge standard be

[[Page 1666]]

used in the regulations because of compliance costs, and that 
clarification be provided as to how liability would apply between a 
cloud-computing service provider and its customers (the data owners).
    This comment lacked sufficient specificity for the Department to 
address the observation related to the ability of U.S. companies to 
deploy AI models in the context of this regulation. The commenter also 
failed to demonstrate how their observations or suggestions regarding 
not actively conducting due diligence or adopting an actual knowledge 
standard would mitigate the risk to national security that the Order 
was intended to mitigate. Additionally, with respect to the commenter's 
latter concern, the Department directs the commenter to definition of 
the term ``knowingly'' in Sec.  202.230 along with its various 
examples. Specifically, Example 5 in Sec.  202.230(b)(5) addresses the 
situation contemplated by this comment. Thus, the Department declines 
to make any further changes in response to this comment.
    Another commenter observed that the knowingly standard ignores or 
fails to appreciate the billions of transactions occurring across every 
country and network of the globe. The comment then described, in the 
context of cloud computing, the perceived difficulties with determining 
bulk data thresholds, data content, covered persons, and the three 
categories of restricted transactions in light of the knowingly 
standard.
    This comment seems to entirely misconstrue how the knowledge 
standard works vis-[agrave]-vis cloud providers and their customers. 
The Department has not suggested that a cloud provider necessarily be 
held responsible for whether its U.S. person customers are making their 
data available via the provider's cloud platform to a country of 
concern or covered person as part of a restricted transaction. Rather, 
the Department is seeking to ensure that if a cloud provider itself 
enters into a restricted transaction by relying on employees or vendors 
that are covered persons or by taking certain investments from covered 
persons that would afford those covered persons with access to their 
customer's bulk U.S. sensitive personal data, then they do so 
consistent with the requirements of these regulations. As such, the 
Department makes no changes as a result of this comment.
    Another commenter argued that the rule makes problematic 
assumptions about emerging technologies that the broad ``knowingly'' 
standard exacerbates. As an example, they pointed to Example 1 in Sec.  
202.301(b)(1), arguing that the example assumes that the AI chatbot 
will reproduce bulk sensitive data. The commenter argued that this 
assumption leads to the potential that any technology that is 
vulnerable to attack or misuse would be a covered transaction, and that 
the overly broad definitions are not conducive to innovation and broad 
adoption of new technologies. The commenter therefore recommended that 
the regulations clarify that only data owners, not data resellers such 
as cloud service providers, are responsible for compliance with the 
rule, or, in the alternative, that the knowingly standard be limited to 
actual knowledge.
    The commenter's arguments and perspective lack sufficient factual 
specificity needed for the Department to respond. However, generally, 
the commenter's concerns are addressed in the NPRM and in parts IV.B.2 
and IV.B.19 of this preamble. Additionally, the national security risks 
that the rule is seeking to address are present regardless of whether 
the data owner or the data transmitter, such as a cloud-services 
provider, is the one who provides countries of concern or covered 
persons access to government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data. Both such entities can help identify and manage these 
risks. Given the nature of the risk, the Department declines to further 
limit the liability of data resellers beyond the current knowingly 
standard.

C. Subpart D--Restricted Transactions

1. Section 202.401--Authorization To Conduct Restricted Transactions
    The NPRM set forth three classes of transactions (vendor 
agreements, employment agreements, and investment agreements) that are 
prohibited unless the U.S. person entering into the transactions 
complies with the ``security requirements'' defined in Sec.  202.248. 
The goal of the security requirements is to address national security 
and foreign policy threats that arise when countries of concern and 
covered persons access government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data that may be implicated by the categories of restricted 
transactions. CISA, in coordination with the Department, developed the 
requirements--the CISA Security Requirements for Restricted 
Transactions--which are on the CISA website, as announced via a 
separate Federal Register notice. That document is incorporated by 
reference into the definition of ``security requirements'' in Sec.  
202.248. The security requirements require U.S. persons engaging in 
restricted transactions to comply with organizational and system-level 
requirements, such as ensuring that basic organizational cybersecurity 
policies, practices, and requirements are in place, as well as data-
level requirements, such as data minimization and masking, encryption, 
or privacy-enhancing techniques. The Department of Justice is 
incorporating by reference the published final security requirements in 
this final rule. Interested parties can view or obtain CISA's security 
requirements on CISA's website https://www.cisa.gov/resources-tools/resources/E.O.-14117-security-requirements.
    One commenter recommended that the Department withhold 
incorporating by reference CISA's security requirements until after 
CISA implements an ex parte process to secure input from critical 
infrastructure sectors. The Department declines to adopt this 
recommendation. The organizational-, system-, and data-level 
requirements specified by CISA's security requirements are derived from 
the existing and commonly used security standards and frameworks that 
are applied across several critical infrastructure sectors. The CISA 
security requirements represent an essential component of addressing 
the risk posed by country of concern and covered person access to 
government-related data and bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. The 
application of these security requirements allows the Department to 
strike the appropriate balance between safeguarding U.S. national 
security and authorizing employment, vendor, and investment agreements 
with countries of concern or covered persons. Without the robust 
safeguards the CISA security requirements provide, the Department would 
not authorize U.S. persons to engage in restricted transactions, and 
those transactions would instead be prohibited due to the risk they 
pose, as discussed below in this part of the preamble. The public has 
already had several opportunities to comment on and engage with the 
Department and CISA in meetings before, during, and after the NPRM's 
comment period to provide input on the security requirements, as 
discussed in part III of this preamble.
    As discussed throughout this preamble, one commenter repeatedly 
assumed that the restricted transactions are ``low risk,'' criticized 
the Department's approach to these transactions, claimed that the 
NPRM's recordkeeping, reporting, and auditing requirements to, for 
example, retain access logs as a means of compliance,

[[Page 1667]]

was tantamount to a ``sweeping surveillance mandate'' for ``billions'' 
of these ``low risk'' transactions, and argued that the Department 
should refrain from regulating restricted transactions at this time.
    The final rule makes no change in response to this comment. The 
categories of restricted transactions are not low risk. There is ample 
open-source and other support for the Department's determination that 
employee, vendor, and investment agreements involving U.S. persons and 
countries of concern or covered persons present an unacceptable risk to 
national security because they may enable countries of concern or 
covered persons to access government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data. As discussed in detail in the ANPRM and NPRM, 
open-source information and examples confirm the Department's 
determination that each of these three commercial activities, to the 
extent that they are not otherwise exempt under the rule, are vectors 
that present unacceptable risk. The comment's assertions that the 
restricted transactions are ``low risk'' or that there are ``millions'' 
or ``billions'' of them is not accompanied by any support or analysis, 
and the comment does not engage with the ANPRM's and NPRM's analysis of 
this issue. In addition, the comment's assertion about the national 
security risks posed by particular kinds of transactions necessarily 
reflects limits on the information available to the public.
    The Intelligence Community and other parts of the United States 
Government have repeatedly warned that foreign adversaries are 
``increasing targeting all kinds of data--from personally identifying 
information, such as your Social Security number, to health and genomic 
data,'' and that they view such data ``as a strategic resource and 
collection priority, not only for their own economic advancement, but 
also for their intelligence and military operations.'' \107\ These 
adversaries ``use every tool in the toolkit--they may recruit an 
insider, use a cyber intrusion, make an investment, recruit top talent, 
or do some combination of all of those things,'' and thus they use not 
only illegal but also ``quasi-legal and even legal tactics[ ]whereby 
they acquire data through seemingly legitimate investments, 
partnerships, joint ventures, or regulatory actions.'' \108\ In 
particular, China ``recruit[s] human sources to target our businesses, 
using insiders to steal the same kinds of innovation and data that 
their hackers are targeting while also engaging in corporate 
deception--hiding Beijing's hand in transactions, joint ventures, and 
investments--to do the same.'' \109\ As summarized in more detail in 
part IV.B.5 of this preamble, the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
(``FBI'') has explained that companies operating under legal and 
political systems like the PRC's present a hybrid commercial threat 
precisely because they can be compelled, influenced, or leveraged to 
provide access to technology, systems, and data through their 
commercial activities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \107\ Michael C. Casey, Dir., Nat'l Counterintel. & Sec. Ctr., 
Remarks for the Economic Development Association of Alabama, 3 (Jan. 
30, 2024), https://www.dni.gov/files/NCSC/documents/SafeguardingOurFuture/FINAL-FINAL-Prepared-Remarks_01302024_Casy_Alabama.pdf [https://perma.cc/GZ9F-Z7KE].
    \108\ Id. at 4, 6; see also Nat'l Counterintel. & Sec. Ctr., 
Protect Your Organization from the Foreign Intelligence Threat 1 
(Dec. 2021), https://www.dni.gov/files/NCSC/documents/SafeguardingOurFuture/12.13.2021%20Protect%20Your%20Org%20from%20the%20Foreign%20Intel%20Threat.pdf [https://perma.cc/X9YU-VVHH].
    \109\ The Strategic Competition Between the U.S. and the Chinese 
Communist Party: Hearing Before the H. Select Comm., 108th Cong. 
(2024) (statement of Christopher Wray, Director, Fed. Bureau of 
Investig.), https://www.fbi.gov/news/speeches/director-wrays-opening-statement-to-the-house-select-committee-on-the-chinese-communist-party [https://perma.cc/89CA-DPHQ]; see also Nat'l 
Counterintel. & Sec. Ctr., Protecting Critical Supply Chains: 
Building a Resilient Ecosystem 2 (Sept. 2024), https://www.dni.gov/files/NCSC/documents/supplychain/Building-a-Resilient-Ecosystem.pdf 
[https://perma.cc/L7SN-UX8C].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    With respect to employees and other individuals with authorized 
access to sensitive personal data, the United States Government has 
publicly recognized that foreign intelligence entities ``actively 
target, solicit, and coerce individuals to obtain information,'' among 
other things, and that insiders may use their authorized access to harm 
U.S. national security.\110\ For instance, Chinese law authorizes 
``national intelligence work agencies'' to use ``any necessary methods, 
means, and channels'' to carry out ``intelligence work both 
domestically and abroad,'' including by establishing ``cooperative 
relationships with relevant individuals and organizations'' and 
``entrust[ing] them with related tasks.'' \111\ PRC intelligence 
services often use ``cooperative contacts'' in countries outside of the 
PRC to further their intelligence goals, including obtaining 
information concerning foreign companies, politicians, intelligence 
officers, and political dissidents.\112\ In August 2024, for example, a 
U.S. person pled guilty after obtaining a wide variety of information 
at the request of Chinese intelligence, including location and other 
sensitive data about Chinese dissidents, pro-democracy advocates, and 
members of the Falun Gong religious movement, as well as information 
about his employer, a major U.S. telecommunications company.\113\ 
Similarly, the United States Government has issued an advisory about 
the threats posed by IT workers from North Korea, who can 
``surreptitiously obtain IT development contracts,'' misrepresent 
themselves as U.S.-based teleworkers, and ``[u]se privileged access 
gained as contractors for illicit purposes, including enabling 
malicious cyber intrusions by other [North Korean] actors.'' \114\ With 
respect to investments, the United States Government has publicly 
warned that the tactics of countries of concern include using 
``mergers, acquisitions, investments, and joint ventures'' to obtain 
sensitive personal data.\115\ This ``include[s] leveraging venture 
capital (VC) investments, investments through entities based in third 
countries, investments as limited partners, and iterative minority 
investments.'' \116\ For example, the National Counterintelligence and 
Security Center (``NCSC'') has publicly assessed that the PRC ``has for 
years been able to gain access to U.S. healthcare data, including 
genomic data,'' through channels that include ``investing in U.S. firms 
that handle sensitive healthcare and other types of personal data, 
providing them

[[Page 1668]]

entry to the U.S. market and access to this data.'' \117\ For example, 
``China's BGI purchased U.S. genomic sequencing firm Complete Genomics 
in 2013,'' and in 2015, ``China's WuXi Pharma Tech acquired U.S. firm 
NextCODE Health to later form WuXi NextCODE Genomics.'' \118\ Then, in 
2020, the ``U.S. Department of Commerce sanctioned two subsidiaries of 
China's BGI for their role in conducting genetic analysis used to 
further the PRC government's repression of Uyghurs and other Muslim 
minority groups in Xinjiang.'' \119\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \110\ Nat'l Counterintel. & Sec. Ctr., supra note 6, at 7.
    \111\ In Camera, Ex Parte Classified Decl. of David Newman, 
Principal Deputy Assistant Att'y Gen., Nat'l Sec. Div., U.S. Dep't 
of Just., Doc. No. 2066897 at Gov't App. 51 ] 22, TikTok Inc. v. 
Garland, Case Nos. 24-1113, 24-1130, 24-1183 (D.C. Cir. July 26, 
2024) (publicly filed redacted version) (hereinafter ``Newman 
Decl.'') (quoting a translation of the National Intelligence Law of 
the People's Republic of China, promulgated by the Standing 
Committee of the National People's Congress, June 27, 2017, 
effective June 28, 2017, amended Apr. 27, 2018).
    \112\ Press Release, U.S. Dep't of Just., Florida 
Telecommunications and Information Technology Worker Sentenced for 
Conspiring to Act as Agent of Chinese Government (Nov. 25, 2024), 
https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/florida-telecommunications-and-information-technology-worker-sentenced-conspiring-act-agent 
[https://perma.cc/3L7E-RQRP].
    \113\ See, e.g., Plea Agreement, United States v. Ping Li, No. 
8:24-cr-334-SDM-NHA (M.D. Fla. Aug. 19, 2024).
    \114\ Off. of Foreign Asset Control, U.S. Dep't of Treas., Fact 
Sheet: Guidance on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
Information Technology Workers (May 16, 2022), https://ofac.treasury.gov/media/923131/download?inline [https://perma.cc/8DTV-Q34S].
    \115\ Casey, supra note 107, at 3; see also Nat'l Counterintel. 
& Sec. Ctr., Protect Your Organization from the Foreign Intelligence 
Threat, 1 (Dec. 2021), https://www.dni.gov/files/NCSC/documents/SafeguardingOurFuture/12.13.2021%20Protect%20Your%20Org%20from%20the%20Foreign%20Intel%20Threat.pdf [https://perma.cc/X9YU-VVHH].
    \116\ Casey, supra note 107, at 7.
    \117\ Nat'l Counterintel. & Sec. Ctr., supra note 67, at 2.
    \118\ Id.
    \119\ Id. at 3.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    With respect to vendors, the United States Government has publicly 
assessed that ``contractors, sub-contractors, and vendors that have 
been granted access to facilities, systems, and networks may 
wittingly--or unwittingly--do harm to'' an organizations' supply 
chain.\120\ By providing software and other services to U.S. companies, 
vendors can gain access to sensitive U.S. persons' data for nefarious 
purposes.\121\ DHS has similarly warned that the ``PRC legal and 
regulatory framework around data offers little to no protection to U.S. 
firms that share data with PRC firms or entities,'' particularly ``data 
service providers and data infrastructure'' such as ``data centers 
owned or operated by PRC firms,'' ``joint ventures'' with PRC firms, 
and ``software and mobile applications owned or operated by PRC 
firms.'' \122\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \120\ Nat'l Counterintel. & Sec. Ctr., supra note 109, at 5.
    \121\ See, e.g., U.S. Dep't of Commerce, Final Determination: 
Case No. ICTS-20121-002, Kaspersky Lab, Inc., 89 FR 52434, 52436 
(June 24, 2024) (describing how Kaspersky employees gained access to 
sensitive U.S. person data through their provision of anti-virus and 
cybersecurity software).
    \122\ U.S. Dep't of Homeland Sec. supra note 57, at 2, 10-12.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    For example:
     In July 2022, news outlets reported that ``Google was 
sharing potentially sensitive user data with a sanctioned Russian ad 
tech company owned by Russia's largest state bank'' for four months 
after the company was sanctioned.\123\ According to the reporting, the 
data Google shared included data about ``users browsing websites based 
in Ukraine,'' which ``means Google may have turned over such critical 
information as unique mobile phone IDs, IP addresses, location 
information[,] and details about users' interests and online activity, 
data that U.S. senators and experts say could be used by Russian 
military and intelligence services to track people or zero in on 
locations of interest.'' \124\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \123\ Craig Silverman, Google Allowed a Sanctioned Russian Ad 
Company to Harvest User Data for Months, ProPublica, (July 1, 2022), 
https://www.propublica.org/article/google-russia-rutarget-sberbank-sanctions-ukraine [https://perma.cc/6R4V-L868].
    \124\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

     In July 2021, a Reuters special investigation reported 
that a Chinese genomics company (BGI Group) ``selling prenatal tests 
around the world developed them in collaboration with the country's 
military and is using them to collect genetic data from millions of 
women.'' \125\ According to the report, United States Government 
advisors warned that the company is amassing ``a vast bank of genomic 
data'' and ``analy[z]ing [it] with artificial intelligence,'' which 
could ``potentially lead to genetically enhanced soldiers, or 
engineered pathogens to target the U.S. population or food supply.'' 
\126\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \125\ Kirsty Needham & Clare Baldwin, Special Report: China's 
Gene Giant Harvests Data From Millions of Women, Reuters (July 7, 
2021), https://www.reuters.com/article/world/special-report-chinas-gene-giant-harvests-data-from-millions-of-women-idUSKCN2ED1A5/ 
[https://perma.cc/3VPW-AP5D].
    \126\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

     According to a 2021 NCSC assessment, ``Chinese companies 
have also gained access to U.S. healthcare data by partnering with 
hospitals, universities, and other research organizations in America. 
These U.S. entities routinely seek low-cost genomic sequencing services 
for their facilities, which Chinese biotech firms can often provide due 
to Chinese government subsidies . . . These partnerships allow U.S. 
entities to expand their research capabilities, while Chinese firms 
gain access to more genetic data on more diverse sets of people, which 
they can use for new medical products and services.'' \127\ For 
example, ``[o]ver the past decade, China's BGI has partnered with many 
research and healthcare entities in America to provide them with 
genomic sequencing services, while also gaining access to health 
records and genetic data on people in the U[nited] S[tates].'' \128\ 
And ``[i]n July 2020, the U.S. Department of Commerce sanctioned two 
subsidiaries of China's BGI for their role in conducting genetic 
analysis used to further the PRC government's repression of Uyghurs and 
other Muslim minority groups in Xinjiang.'' \129\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \127\ Nat'l Counterintel. & Sec. Ctr., supra note 67, at 2.
    \128\ Id. at 3.
    \129\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    More broadly, employee, vendor, and investment relationships have 
been vectors exploitable and exploited by countries of concern to 
access critical infrastructure, technology, trade secrets and 
intellectual property, research, and other assets. For example, on 
August 8, 2024, a Federal grand jury returned an indictment against a 
U.S. person for facilitating a scheme to deceive American and British 
companies into hiring foreign remote IT workers who were actually North 
Korean actors. The companies paid the North Korean actors hundreds of 
thousands of dollars that were funneled to North Korea for its weapons 
program.\130\ And in March 2024, a Federal grand jury indicted a 
Chinese national for theft of trade secrets. As a Google software 
engineer, the individual was granted access to Google's confidential 
information related to the hardware infrastructure, the software 
platform, and the AI models and applications they supported. Between 
2022 and 2023, he uploaded and transferred over 500 sensitive files, 
including proprietary hardware and software data used by Google's AI 
supercomputing systems for machine learning. The individual sent this 
data to his personal account while secretly traveling to China, working 
for two PRC-based companies in the AI industry, and eventually founding 
his own AI company in China while still serving as a Google employee. 
The individual had another Google employee swipe his work-issued access 
badge to make it appear that he was working from his U.S. Google office 
when, in fact, he was in the PRC.\131\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \130\ Press Release, U.S. Dep't of Just., Justice Department 
Disrupts North Korean Remote IT Worker Fraud Schemes Through Charges 
and Arrest of Nashville Facilitator (Aug. 8, 2024), https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/justice-department-disrupts-north-korean-remote-it-worker-fraud-schemes-through-charges-and [https://perma.cc/Z4P2-G7TN].
    \131\ Press Release, U.S. Dep't of Just., Chinese National 
Residing in California Arrested for Theft of Artificial 
Intelligence-Related Trade Secrets from Google (Mar. 6, 2024), 
https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/chinese-national-residing-california-arrested-theft-artificial-intelligence-related-trade [https://perma.cc/R88W-RBAU].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Other examples include the following:
     In September 2018, journalists reported that China's 
antitrust authorities raided a U.S. chemical company's Shanghai office, 
demanding access to the company's research network, passwords, and 
printed document; seizing computers; and intimidating employees. The 
raids came one year into an arbitration battle between the U.S. company 
and its former Chinese joint venture partner, who the U.S. company 
suspected had obtained and was using the U.S. company's proprietary 
technology without permission. The Chinese antitrust investigators 
pressured the

[[Page 1669]]

U.S. company to drop the arbitration case to resolve the antitrust 
investigation, seemingly as part of a broader strategy to exert control 
over foreign companies and their intellectual property.\132\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \132\ Lingling Wei & Bob Davis, How Chinese Systematically Pries 
Technology from U.S. Companies, Wall Street Journal (Sept. 26, 
2018), https://www.wsj.com/articles/how-china-systematically-pries-technology-from-u-s-companies-1537972066.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

     In 2018, the New York Times published an article detailing 
how a U.S. semiconductor company, Micron, was the target of 
intellectual property theft in Taiwan. After Micron rejected 
acquisition and partnership offers by Chinese chipmakers in 2015, 
Fujian Jinhua Integrated Circuit Company (a Chinese company) and UMC (a 
Taiwanese company) partnered to build a chip making factory in China. 
Jinhua tapped UMC to develop the necessary technology and UMC allegedly 
recruited Micron employees, who stole propriety information from Micron 
before leaving the company. Micron filed a lawsuit against UMC and 
Jinhua in the United States, accusing them of trade secret theft. UMC 
denied the allegations, but Taiwanese police raided UMC offices and 
recovered the stolen documents and devices. Meanwhile, Jinhua and UMC 
filed a patent infringement lawsuit against Micron in China, which 
could block Micron's sales in the country.\133\ The Micron case is 
emblematic of how the Chinese government uses every legal and 
regulatory lever--poaching talent, subsidies, patent infringement, 
antitrust, outright theft, and the courts--to pressure individual 
companies to transfer technology or not pursue cases of theft.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \133\ Paul Mozur, Inside a Heist of American Chip Designs, as 
China Bids for Tech Power, New York Times (June 22, 2018), https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/22/technology/china-micron-chips-theft.html 
[https://perma.cc/B3L4-NNNM].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

     In March 2019, Tesla accused a former engineer of stealing 
intellectual property from the company's self-driving car project and 
providing that information to a Chinese electric vehicle startup 
company. The individual allegedly copied more than 300,000 files and 
directories, repeatedly logged into Tesla's networks, and cleared his 
browser history before leaving Tesla for the rival employer.\134\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \134\ Sherisse Pham Tesla Is Accusing a Former Employe of 
Stealing Self-Driving and Giving It to a Chinese Rival CNN (Mar. 22, 
2019), https://www.cnn.com/2019/03/22/tech/tesla-xiaopeng-motors-lawsuit/index.html [https://perma.cc/W76V-QT88].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    With adversaries' increasing strategic focus on Americans' 
sensitive data as one of the assets to fuel their intelligence and 
military activities, it should come as no surprise that they would use 
the same vectors to access companies, systems, and other repositories 
of sensitive personal data. In light of the risks to government-related 
data and bulk U.S. sensitive personal data posed by employment, vendor, 
and investment agreements, the Department considered outright 
prohibiting transactions conducted through those vehicles. The 
Department believes that, given the gravity of the threats and the 
plethora of examples where countries of concern have exploited these 
vehicles to obtain access to U.S. person data, the risks would justify 
such prohibitions. However, because the Department has determined that 
the security requirements can adequately mitigate these risks, the rule 
characterizes these transactions as restricted transactions.
    The same commenter claimed that while the NPRM had well defined 
objectives for what they characterized as ``high-risk'' prohibited 
transactions, objectives were not well-defined for what they 
characterized as ``low-risk'' restricted transactions. This commenter 
concluded that this could result in: (1) forcing companies to decrypt 
encrypted data, thereby undermining U.S. data security and 
cybersecurity; (2) requiring the aggregation of vast quantities of 
sensitive personal and non-personal data, creating further 
cybersecurity risks; (3) criminalizing and deterring ordinary business 
transactions with U.S. allies; and (4) impeding low-risk information 
sharing with U.S. allies needed for scientific, health, or other 
purposes. The Department has already addressed the mischaracterization 
of risk by this commenter, so this point will not be readdressed.
    In response to the commenter's other points, first, the Department 
reiterates that nothing in the rule imposes a legal requirement to 
decrypt or aggregate data to comply. The NPRM extensively explained 
this point, and the commenter did not engage with that explanation at 
all or offer any substantive analysis to support the commenter's claim. 
The Department expects companies to ``know their data'' but has been 
clear throughout this rulemaking process that decryption is not a 
required step in that effort. Indeed, other commenters that will be 
subject to this rule have acknowledged that there is no need to decrypt 
encrypted data. For example, during at least one of the Department's 
engagements with stakeholders, a public-interest research center 
acknowledged that the proposed rule would not require companies to 
decrypt their data to know whether they are regulated or to comply.
    Second, the Department expects companies to know their data when 
they are dealing in government-related data and bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data. Companies choosing to engage in these categories of data 
transactions can and should have some awareness of the volume of data 
they possess and in which they are transacting. For example, data-using 
entities typically maintain metrics, such as user statistics, that can 
help estimate the number of impacted individuals for the purposes of 
identifying whether a particular transaction meets the bulk 
threshold.\135\ Given that the bulk thresholds are built around order-
of-magnitude evaluations of the quantity of user data, it is reasonable 
for entities to conduct similar order-of-magnitude-based assessments of 
their data stores and transactions for the purposes of regulatory 
compliance. Companies already must understand, categorize, and map the 
volumes of data they have for other regulatory requirements, such as 
State laws requiring notification of data breaches of specific kinds of 
data above certain thresholds.\136\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \135\ Justin Ellingwood, User Data Collection: Balancing 
Business Needs and User Privacy, DigitalOcean (Sept. 26, 2017), 
https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/user-data-collection-balancing-business-needs-and-user-privacy [https://perma.cc/GCX5-RGSK]; Jodie Siganto, Data Tagging: Best Practices, 
Security & Implementation Tips, Privacy 108 (Nov. 14, 2023), https://privacy108.com.au/insights/data-tagging-for-security/ [https://perma.cc/8PQA-89DA]; Nat'l Inst. of Health, Metrics for Data 
Repositories and Knowledgebases: Working Group Report 7, (Sept. 15, 
2021), https://datascience.nih.gov/sites/default/files/Metrics-Report-2021-Sep15-508.pdf [https://perma.cc/8KBQ-HWRK].
    \136\ See, e.g., Del. Code. Ann. tit. 6, secs. 12B-100 to -104 
(West 2024); N.M. Stat. Ann. sec. 57-12C-10 (LexisNexis 2024).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Third, the rule does not criminalize or deter ordinary business 
transactions with U.S. allies. As discussed in part IV.F.1 of this 
preamble, the fact that the rule has cross-border ramifications for 
companies located in countries that are not countries of concern due to 
the ownership networks of covered persons and countries of concern and 
covered persons speaks to the pervasive reach of covered persons and 
countries of concern. Their ability to influence and compel access, or 
obtain it through these ownership structures, which span across 
countries and continents provides further support for the need to 
address this risk to our national security.
    Another commentor recommended that the Department clarify that the 
provisions regulating restricted transactions are intended to address 
the risks attendant in allowing covered persons access to covered data, 
but are

[[Page 1670]]

not intended to prevent access by the covered person. Although this 
comment does not require any change to the rule, the restricted 
transactions are classes of transactions that would be prohibited 
except to the extent they comply with CISA's security requirements, 
which are designed to mitigate the risk of access to government-related 
data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. As CISA's final security 
requirements explain, the security requirements are meant to prevent 
access to covered data by countries of concern or covered persons 
unless specific efforts outlined in the security requirements are taken 
to minimize the national security risks associated with such access. As 
further explained by CISA, the security requirements accomplish this 
goal by requiring U.S. persons to implement a combination of 
mitigations that, taken together, are sufficient to fully and 
effectively prevent access by covered persons or countries of concern 
to sensitive personal data that is linkable, identifiable, unencrypted, 
or decryptable using commonly available technology, consistent with the 
required data risk assessment. That could be accomplished, as the 
security requirements explain, by denying access outright or by only 
allowing covered persons access to sensitive personal data for which 
regulated persons have instituted other data-level requirements that 
mitigate the risks of countries of concern or covered persons obtaining 
direct access to the underlying government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data (in addition to applying the organizational and 
system-level requirements).
    The Department expects that complying with the security 
requirements will not ordinarily result in a de facto prohibition on 
restricted transactions and instead would typically permit restricted 
transactions to go forward. As CISA's final security requirements point 
out, a U.S. business could choose to fully deny a covered person access 
to government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data while 
still executing a restricted transaction that would otherwise allow 
access to the business's networks and systems. For example, a U.S. 
business that holds bulk U.S. sensitive personal data could accept an 
investment from a covered person or hire a covered person as a board 
director (a restricted transaction) by complying with the security 
requirements to deny or otherwise mitigate the covered person's access 
to that data. The covered person in those restricted transactions could 
perform their responsibilities without access to that data (or with 
access to that data if the regulated entities have instituted adequate 
data-level requirements, in addition to the organizational and system-
level requirements).
    To be sure, it is possible that, in what the Department expects to 
be relatively rare circumstances, the only service that a covered 
person would be providing as part of a restricted transaction would 
require access to data that is linkable, identifiable, unencrypted, or 
decryptable using commonly available technology, such that complying 
with the security requirements would preclude that transaction. Because 
compliance with the security requirements would preclude the provision 
of the service, the restricted transaction in that circumstance may be 
effectively prohibited, absent the grant of a specific license 
authorizing it. That result would be consistent with the unacceptable 
national security risks of allowing covered persons to access the 
underlying data.
    Some commenters provided feedback on the security requirements that 
would govern restricted transactions. The Order makes CISA, not the 
Department, responsible for developing the security requirements. The 
Department has shared with CISA any comments that are relevant to the 
security requirements but were erroneously filed in the docket for this 
rulemaking.
2. Section 202.258--Vendor Agreement
    The proposed rule defined a ``vendor agreement'' as any agreement 
or arrangement, other than an employment agreement, in which any person 
provides goods or services to another person, including cloud-computing 
services, in exchange for payment or other consideration.
    A commenter sought clarification on whether the rule would apply to 
U.S.-based third-party cloud-computing service platforms that provide 
storage and IT services. The term ``vendor agreement'' refers to a kind 
of activity, not a kind of entity. The provision of cloud-computing 
services falls squarely within the definition of ``vendor agreement.'' 
As explained in part IV.B.19 of this preamble, a U.S. person providing 
cloud-computing services, would, like any other U.S. person, be 
prohibited from engaging in its own covered data transactions that are 
prohibited or restricted by the rule.
    The same commenter also suggested adding an exemption for cloud 
service providers or clarifying whether the knowledge standard would be 
met if a customer manages their data independently. The Department 
declines to add such an exemption, noting that the rule aims to protect 
access regardless of the services offered, and any exemption would not 
sufficiently mitigate the associated threats. The application of the 
``knowing'' standard to cloud services is discussed separately in part 
IV.B.19 of this preamble.
    The same commenter sought clarity on whether the restrictions on 
vendor agreements extend to subsidiaries or affiliates of U.S. 
companies located in countries of concern. As explained in part IV.F.1 
of this preamble, a U.S. company's foreign subsidiary, organized under 
the laws of or with its principal place of business in a country of 
concern, is a separate entity from its U.S. parent. As Example 6 in 
Sec.  202.256(b)(6) shows, the U.S. parent would be a U.S. person, and 
the subsidiary would be a covered person. As a result, the U.S. parent 
would generally be restricted from engaging in a vendor agreement with 
its covered person subsidiary if that agreement provides the subsidiary 
with access to government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal 
data. No change to the rule is required in response to this request for 
clarification.
3. Section 202.217--Employment Agreement
    The proposed rule defined an ``employment agreement'' as any 
agreement or arrangement in which an individual, other than as an 
independent contractor, performs work or performs job functions 
directly for a person in exchange for payment or other consideration, 
including employment on a board or committee, executive-level 
arrangements or services, and employment services at an operational 
level.
    One commenter suggested that the Department delete Sec.  202.217 
and instead exempt employment agreements from the scope of the rule. 
The commenter noted that employment agreements are contracts signed 
between enterprises and individuals and made the unsupported assertion 
that a restriction on employment agreements with citizens of countries 
of concern or non-American citizens living in countries of concern is a 
discriminatory policy that infringes on individuals' equal employment 
rights and violates their human rights. The Department declines to 
implement this change.
    The inclusion of employment agreements within the scope of 
restricted transactions is related to the national security risk 
articulated in the NPRM. As noted, the legal and political regimes of 
countries of concern enable

[[Page 1671]]

them to compel employees who work for their companies or within their 
territory to share information with these governments, including their 
intelligence services, creating a significant risk to U.S. national 
security. Further, the rule itself does not prohibit employment 
agreements with individuals in a country of concern or employed by a 
covered person, but rather simply requires that the CISA security 
measures be in place to ensure that those covered person employees 
cannot access government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal 
data that is linkable, identifiable, unencrypted, or decryptable using 
commonly available technology by covered persons and/or countries of 
concern, consistent with the required data risk assessment.
    This rule is not discriminatory. It does not turn on racial, 
ethnic, or national identity; instead, the rule identifies categories 
of covered persons based on the risk that a country of concern could 
leverage such a person or entity to access government-related data or 
bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. The criteria in Sec.  202.211(a) 
does not indiscriminately apply, for example, to everyone of Chinese 
nationality. To the contrary, covered person categories distinguish 
between non-U.S. citizens who primarily reside in a country of concern 
(who are covered persons because they are subject to the jurisdiction 
and legal regimes of the country of concern's government); non-U.S. 
citizens who are not primarily resident in a country of concern (who 
are only covered persons if they work for a country of concern or 
covered person, or are individually designated); and anyone located in 
the United States (who are not covered persons, unless designated, 
because of the weaker categorical ability of countries of concern to 
subject them to the country of concern's jurisdiction or to otherwise 
direct or control their actions). As such, the rule adopts the proposed 
approach from the NPRM without change.
    One commenter asked for ``additional clarification regarding 
exemptions related to a Chinese national that receives employment, 
particularly for instances where Chinese nationals are employed in the 
United States and go through the immigration process.'' Although this 
question is not entirely clear, the commenter appears to be asking 
whether the provisions regarding restricted transactions would apply to 
an employment agreement between a country of concern's national and a 
U.S. company while the national's application for a change of 
immigration status is pending. The answer depends on several additional 
facts. If the Chinese national is employed in the United States and is 
living in the United States, then the individual meet the definition of 
a U.S. person, which includes ``any person in the United States.'' As 
such, the individual is not a foreign person and would therefore not 
meet the criteria of any of the categories of covered persons (unless 
individually designated). In this scenario, therefore, the employment 
agreement between the Chinese national and the U.S. company would not 
be a restricted transaction because it is between two U.S. persons.
    By contrast, if the Chinese national is primarily resident in a 
country of concern, works outside the United States for the government 
of a country of concern or for another covered person, or has been 
designated as a covered person, then the individual would be a covered 
person. In that scenario, as a result, the employment agreement between 
the Chinese national and the U.S. company would be a restricted 
transaction. The fact that the Chinese national has applied for a 
pending change of U.S. immigration status would not alter that 
individual's status as a covered person. With respect to a change in 
immigration status, the national would become a U.S. person under Sec.  
202.256 (and thus lose their status as a covered person, unless 
designated) only upon an actual change in--not mere application for a 
change in--their status such that they are ``admitted to the United 
States as a refugee under 8 U.S.C. 1157 or granted asylum under 8 
U.S.C. 1158'' or become a U.S. citizen, national, or lawful permanent 
resident. No change to the rule is necessary to clarify this point.
    The same commenter remarked that the provisions on restricted 
transactions ``impose substantial constraints on employment agreements 
in countries of concern, potentially creating compliance challenges 
that extend beyond U.S. jurisdiction.'' The commenter noted that these 
restrictions could hinder the legal structuring of employment 
agreements, which must also adhere to foreign regulatory requirements, 
and urged the Department to consider adjustments to the regulations to 
avoid conflicts with foreign data protection laws. First, the 
Department clarifies that the rule regulates U.S. persons engaging in 
covered data transactions that involve employee agreements with covered 
persons or countries of concern and does not target employment 
agreements ``in countries of concern.'' Next, the commenter did not 
provide support or analysis for their assertions that the rule imposes 
substantial constraints that would potentially hinder entering into 
such agreements or create conflicts with foreign data protection laws. 
The Department reiterates that the rule does not prevent employment 
agreements with covered persons or countries of concern, but instead 
requires U.S. companies to meet certain security requirements and other 
applicable requirements. Lastly, the Department finds unpersuasive the 
commenter's argument that making companies adhere to foreign regulatory 
requirements would hinder the legal structuring of employment 
agreements, as navigating domestic and foreign regulations and 
provisions is inherent in the nature of engaging in cross-border 
business, even separate from this rule.
    Another commenter asked the Department whether unpaid service on a 
volunteer board would be considered ``other consideration.'' The value 
and benefit derived from one's experience can constitute ``other 
consideration'' as part of an exchange for services rendered, even if 
on a volunteer basis or for charitable or humanitarian purposes. No 
change has been made to this provision as a result of this comment.
    One commenter noted that while the NPRM discussed the regulations 
on the employment of covered persons by U.S. companies, clarification 
is needed regarding the employment of covered individuals by non-U.S. 
affiliated companies. Generally, the provisions of Sec.  202.401 
regulate U.S. persons engaging in restricted transactions involving an 
employment agreement with a country of concern or covered person. 
Absent evasion or avoidance scenarios, or fact patterns wherein a 
foreign person causes a U.S. person to violate the provisions of this 
rule, foreign persons are not restricted from engaging in employment 
agreements with covered persons. No change to the rule is necessary in 
response to this comment.
    This same commenter also asked for clarification on the extent to 
which the rule would apply to a foreign entity that includes U.S. 
affiliates. The commenter did not provide enough specificity or facts 
for the Department to meaningfully address this question (such as the 
relationship between the foreign entity and the U.S. affiliates, 
whether the foreign entity is a covered person, and the nature of the 
transactions at issue). In general, however, any affiliate is a 
separate entity that, like a subsidiary, would have to be independently 
analyzed to determine whether it meets the definitions of U.S. person, 
foreign person, or covered person. To the extent that the commenter has 
a more specific question, the commenter can seek an advisory opinion.

[[Page 1672]]

    Another commenter recommended that the Department clarify that the 
term ``employment agreement'' does not extend to roles that do not have 
or that are unlikely to have access to covered data by virtue of 
covered data transactions, such as office, human resources, or other 
functions that the commenter says are an essential part of regular 
business processes and that would not otherwise be covered by the 
exemption for corporate group transactions. Under Sec.  202.401, a 
restricted transaction prohibits U.S. persons from knowingly engaging 
in a covered data transaction involving an employment agreement with a 
country of concern or covered person, unless the U.S. person complies 
with the security requirements and all other applicable requirements. 
Where there is no covered data transaction, the employment agreement is 
not a restricted transaction, even if the employee is a covered person. 
This same commenter also sought confirmation of whether it would be a 
restricted transaction involving an employment agreement for a U.S. 
person company to provide access to basic company information, such as 
a company staff directory, to business offices in a country of concern. 
The commenter did not provide enough information to assess the 
potential outcome. As such, the Department advises this commenter to 
seek an advisory opinion, following the provisions of Sec.  202.901.
    Finally, another commenter asked whether the outcome in Example 4 
in Sec.  202.217 would change if the data scientist hired by the 
financial services company were developing a new AI-based personal 
assistant as part of the provision of financial services, not as a 
standalone product that could be sold to the company's customers. The 
Department presumes that this commenter's question was whether the 
financial services exemption in Sec.  202.505 would apply and the 
answer is no. A covered person data scientist, who is provided 
administrator rights allowing that covered person to access, download, 
and transmit bulk quantities of personal financial data, is not an 
exempt transaction because it is not ordinarily incident to the 
provision of financial services. Similarly, sharing such data with a 
covered person for the purpose of developing a new AI-based personal 
assistant is not ordinarily incident to the provision of financial 
services. Furthermore, as noted in the NPRM, the Department does not 
believe that an employment agreement or a vendor agreement that gives a 
covered person access to bulk U.S. sensitive personal data is a 
reasonable and typical practice in providing the underlying financial 
services that do not otherwise involve covered persons or a country of 
concern. The Department makes no change to the rule in response to this 
comment.
4. Section 202.228--Investment Agreement
    The proposed rule defined an ``investment agreement'' as any 
agreement or arrangement in which any person, in exchange for payment 
or other consideration, obtains direct or indirect ownership interests 
in or rights in relation to (1) real estate located in the United 
States or (2) a U.S. legal entity. The proposed rule categorically 
excluded certain passive investments that do not pose an unacceptable 
risk to national security because they do not give countries of concern 
or covered persons a controlling ownership interest, rights in 
substantive decision-making, or influence through a non-controlling 
interest that could be exploited to access government-related data or 
bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. Specifically, the proposed rule 
excluded from ``investment agreement'' investments (1) in any publicly 
traded security, in any security offered by any investment company that 
is registered with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission 
(``SEC''), such as index funds, mutual funds, or exchange-traded funds, 
or made as limited partners (or equivalent) into a venture capital 
fund, private equity fund, fund of funds, or other pooled investment 
fund, if the limited partner's contributions and influence are 
circumscribed as set forth in the proposed rule; (2) that give the 
covered person less than 10 percent of total voting and equity interest 
in a U.S. person; and (3) that do not give a covered person rights 
beyond those reasonably considered to be standard minority shareholder 
protections.
    With respect to the requirement of a de minimis percentage of total 
voting and equity interest, in the NPRM, the Department shared that it 
was considering a range of different proposals, including de minimis 
percentages that are significantly lower or higher than this 
percentage, such as the five percent threshold above which investors 
must publicly report their direct or indirect beneficial ownership of 
certain covered securities under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 
15 U.S.C. 78m(d). The Department invited public comment on the specific 
de minimis threshold that should be used in this exception for passive 
investments.
    Two commenters advocated for a higher de minimis threshold. These 
comments urged the Department to adopt a 25-percent threshold, 
contending that it aligns with the Financial Crimes Enforcement 
Network's rules for reporting beneficial owners, as well as with the 
proposed rule's annual reporting requirement for U.S. entities engaging 
in restricted transactions involving cloud-computing services where the 
U.S. entities are 25 percent or more owned by a country of concern or 
covered person.\137\ The commenter also asserted, without support, that 
this threshold is unlikely to give an investor a degree of control that 
threatens national security. The other commenter urged the Department 
to adopt a 35-percent threshold, noting that numerous minority 
investments have more than 10 percent of total voting and equity 
interest but are still entirely passive.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \137\ See 3 CFR 1010.380; 89 FR 86153.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The Department has considered the commenters' input but does not 
believe that increasing the threshold to 25 or 35 percent would 
sufficiently address the national security risks that the rule seeks to 
address. Twenty-five or 35-percent ownership could potentially provide 
an investor meaningful economic leverage or informal influence over 
access to a company's assets (like sensitive personal data) even when 
the investor does not obtain formal rights, control, or access beyond 
standard minority shareholder protections. For example, an investor may 
have sufficient voting power to influence a company's decision-making, 
whether formally through shareholder voting, or informally based on the 
size of the investment, the investor's interest in the company's 
success, and the company's interest in maintaining or expanding the 
investment. This informal influence is exactly the type of leverage 
that the investment agreement category of restricted transactions seeks 
to address.
    Furthermore, the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network rules for 
reporting beneficial ownership are primarily designed to address risks 
posed by shell and shelf entities to the U.S. financial system to 
prevent, for example, money laundering and illicit finance, which are 
different than the kind of risk this rule seeks to address.\138\ 
Similarly, the rule's annual reporting requirement for certain 
restricted transactions is not comparable. The annual reporting

[[Page 1673]]

requirement provides the Department with information about companies 
with notable country of concern ownership that access large amounts of 
sensitive personal data; it does not speak to the applicability of the 
rule to a broad category of transactions, as the investment agreement 
definition does. In contrast, CFIUS regulations, which also focus on 
the national security risks accompanying foreign investments into U.S. 
companies, do not, in certain circumstances, extend to passive 
investments where the investments are less than 10 percent of 
outstanding voting interests and do not include certain rights, such as 
involvement in substantive decision-making.\139\ One commenter noted 
that the passive investment exclusion extends to publicly-traded 
companies and pooled investment funds and does not cover one-percent, 
passive, minority investments into private U.S. entities. The commenter 
suggested carving out these investments on the basis that they are 
truly passive, noting that the exclusion's third prong, which requires 
that the investment does not give a covered person rights beyond those 
reasonably considered to be standard minority shareholder protections, 
ensures that the investments are passive. The Department agrees and has 
modified the requirements of the investment agreement exclusion for 
passive investments in Sec.  202.228(b)(iii) to include limited partner 
investments into private entities. For these reasons, the Department 
slightly expands the scope of the passive investment exclusion and 
adopts a de minimis threshold of 10 percent in the final rule.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \138\ Beneficial Ownership Information Reporting Requirements, 
87 FR 59498, 59498 (Sept. 30, 2022) (to be codified at 31 CFR pt. 
1010) (stating that the rule's requirements are intended to prevent 
and combat money laundering, terrorist financing, corruption, tax 
fraud, and other illicit activity).
    \139\ 31 CFR 800.302(b) (providing that ``covered control 
transactions'' do not include ``a transaction that results in a 
foreign person holding 10 percent or less of the outstanding voting 
interest in a U.S. business . . . but only if the transaction is 
solely for the purpose of passive investment.''); 31 CFR 800.243 
(defining ``solely for the purpose of passive investment'' as 
indicating ownership interests that do not, inter alia, afford any 
rights that if exercised could constitute control or any access, 
rights, and involvement specified in 31 CFR 800.211(b)); 31 CFR 
800.211(b) (specifying access, rights or involvement to include 
board membership observer rights, or involvement in substantive 
decision-making).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

D. Subpart E--Exempt Transactions

    The NPRM proposed exempting several classes of data transactions 
from the scope of the proposed rule's prohibitions. The final rule 
adopts those exemptions with some modifications as discussed in part 
IV.D of this preamble. The final rule also makes clear that the due-
diligence, auditing, reporting, and recordkeeping requirements in 
subpart J and the auditing requirements in subpart K generally do not 
apply to exempt transactions. One exemption, in Sec.  202.510 for 
regulatory approval data, is available only to the extent that the U.S. 
person complies with specified recordkeeping and reporting 
requirements. The generally applicable requirement in Sec.  202.1104 
for U.S. persons to report rejected transactions applies to all 
prohibited transactions; an otherwise exempt transaction would not be 
prohibited. The Department also retains its generally applicable 
authority in Sec.  202.1102 to request and subpoena information. The 
other requirements in subparts J and K are intended to apply only as 
conditions of engaging in restricted transactions and has clarified 
this through additional language in each exemption listed in subpart E.
1. Section 202.502--Information or Informational Materials
    Under IEEPA, ``[t]he President may issue such regulations, 
including regulations prescribing definitions, as may be necessary for 
the exercise of the authorities granted by this chapter.'' \140\ As 
courts have held, this provision explicitly ``authorize[s] the 
Executive Branch to define the statutory terms of IEEPA,'' and 
definitions promulgated by an agency that has been delegated this 
authority thus ``carry the force of law'' subject to judicial 
deference.\141\ Section 2(b) of the Order delegated this statutory 
authority to the Attorney General, and the Department exercises this 
authority to define ``information or informational materials.'' The 
Department received few comments on its proposed interpretation. For 
the reasons explained below and in the NPRM, the final rule adopts the 
definition proposed in the NPRM without change, including with respect 
to information not fully created and in existence at the time of the 
transaction. The Department has, however, changed the definition of 
``sensitive personal data'' in response to comments received on this 
topic to exclude certain metadata.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \140\ 50 U.S.C. 1704.
    \141\ Zarmach Oil Servs., Inc. v. U.S. Dep't of Treas., 750 F. 
Supp. 2d 150, 156 (D.D.C. 2010); see also, e.g., Holy Land Found. v. 
Ashcroft, 333 F.3d 156, 162-63 (D.C. Cir. 2003); United States v. 
Lindh, 212 F. Supp. 2d 541, 562-63 & n.52 (E.D. Va. 2002); Consarc 
Corp. v. U.S. Dep't of Treas., Off. of Foreign Assets Control, 71 
F.3d 909, 914-15 (D.C. Cir. 1995); Consarc Corp. v. Iraqi Ministry, 
27 F.3d 695, 701 (D.C. Cir. 1994).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter asserted that the Department's interpretation would 
not be entitled to deference after the Supreme Court's decision in 
Loper Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo.\142\ The Court's decision in 
Loper Bright explicitly preserved the Executive's authority to 
reasonably define statutory terms when Congress has delegated to the 
Executive the authority to do so.\143\ The Court explained that it was 
the judiciary's responsibility to determine whether Congress had done 
so. Here, Congress was explicit in its delegation of authority to the 
Executive Branch to issue ``regulations prescribing definitions'' as 
``may be necessary for the exercise'' of IEEPA authorities.\144\ This 
express delegation is similar to those examples identified by the Court 
as delegating authority to define terms.\145\ In any event, for the 
reasons explained by the Department in the NPRM and reiterated here, 
the Department believes its interpretation is the best interpretation 
of the statutory term in light of text, structure, and context, 
including the enactment history and legislative history.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \142\ 144 S. Ct. 2244 (2024).
    \143\ Id. at 2263 (``[S]ome statutes ``expressly delegate[ ]'' 
to an agency the authority to give meaning to a particular statutory 
term.'').
    \144\ 50 U.S.C. 1704.
    \145\ Loper Bright, 144 S. Ct. at 2263 n.5 (quoting 29 U.S.C. 
213(a)(15) (``as such terms are defined and delimited by regulations 
of the Secretary'') and 42 U.S.C. 5846(a)(2) (regulating according 
to term ``as defined by regulations which the Commission shall 
promulgate'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    As set out in the NPRM, the Department defines ``information or 
informational materials'' as limited to expressive material, consistent 
with the purpose of 50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(3) to protect materials involving 
the free exchange of ideas from regulation under IEEPA and with IEEPA's 
broader purpose to limit material support to adversaries. See Sec.  
202.226. A broader definition of the term would enable adversaries and 
countries of concern to use non-expressive data to undermine our 
national security.
    Some commenters believed that this interpretation is inconsistent 
with the Berman Amendment. As set out in detail in the NPRM, the 
Department disagrees. Briefly, the Berman Amendment's list of examples 
of information and informational materials reflects Congress' intent to 
protect the import or export of expressive speech and communicative 
works and mediums that may be carrying such expressive content.\146\ 
This is reinforced

[[Page 1674]]

by the Berman Amendment's legislative and drafting history and context, 
which reveal Congress's focus on expressive materials (such as artwork, 
literature, or news media) and on the free exchange of ideas. In 
particular, in enacting the 1994 changes to the Berman Amendment, 
Congress explicitly acknowledged and ratified a meaning of the term 
``information or informational materials'' that was narrower than 
anything that, in a colloquial or dictionary sense, could potentially 
be characterized as ``information or informational materials.'' \147\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \146\ One commenter insisted that the ``ordinary meaning'' of 
the term, including as reflected in an Office of Management and 
Budget (``OMB'') circular, includes non-expressive data. The cited 
OMB circular post-dates the enactment of the Berman Amendment and 
defines the term for use in guidance to agencies for managing 
Federal IT resources. It is therefore of exceedingly negligible 
relevance here. As explained at length in the NPRM, the term 
``information and informational materials'' as used in the Berman 
Amendment cannot be understood outside the specific history and 
context surrounding its enactment. Some commenters pointed out that 
some mediums listed--such as CD ROMs or microfiche--can store non-
expressive data just as well as expressive content. This is 
undoubtedly true but misses the point: Congress listed these media 
types because they are used to store the expressive content such as 
music, artwork, or literature that the provision seeks to protect. 
One commenter contended that the Department's proposed definition 
does not account for the distinct terms ``information'' and 
``informational materials.'' The Department disagrees: the phrase 
refers to expressive content (``information'') as well as the 
mediums containing that content (``informational materials'').
    \147\ See H.R. Rep. No. 103-482, 103d Cong., 2d Sess., at 239 
(conf. rep.), reprinted in 1994 U.S.C.C.A.N. 398, 483; United States 
v. Amirnazmi, 645 F.3d 564, 586 (3d Cir. 2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter contended that information--including the non-
expressive data subject to this rule--would be protected by the First 
Amendment as speech and is therefore categorically within the Berman 
Amendment's prohibition. But whether the non-expressive data subject to 
this rule would be subject to First Amendment analysis does not dictate 
whether it falls within the scope of the Berman Amendment. As the 
legislative history and context make clear, Congress intended with the 
Berman Amendment to advance core First Amendment principles, not to 
wholesale import First Amendment doctrine as such. This commenter's 
suggestion is flatly inconsistent, for example, with Congress's 
conscious preservation of the exception that allows the Executive 
Branch to regulate information--even expressive information--that is 
not fully created at the time of the transaction. That legislative 
choice demonstrates a degree of flexibility reflected in, though not 
necessarily coterminous with, First Amendment doctrine.
    Nor does the Department's interpretation contradict the First 
Amendment orientation of the Berman Amendment or impermissibly burden 
the First Amendment rights of U.S. persons. The rule is analogous to 
the wide range of content-neutral and viewpoint-neutral laws regulating 
commercial transactions involving the sale, disclosure, and use of 
sensitive personal data that courts have consistently upheld against 
First Amendment challenge. As the Supreme Court observed long ago, 
``numerous examples'' of commercial information ``are regulated without 
offending the First Amendment.'' \148\ Courts have consistently held 
that the First Amendment permits viewpoint-neutral restrictions on 
commercial transactions that use, disclose, and sell confidential 
financial information; targeted marketing lists of consumers, 
customers' purchase, rental, and borrowing histories for books, videos, 
and other materials; telecommunication customers' proprietary network 
information; personal dossiers aggregated from public and nonpublic 
information; and consumer-reporting information.\149\ Similarly, these 
types of transactions are not protected from export restrictions under 
IEEPA by the Berman Amendment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \148\ Ohralik v. Ohio State Bar Ass'n, 436 U.S. 447, 456 (1978).
    \149\ E.g., Dun & Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc., 
472 U.S. 749 (1985); id. at 762 (three-justice plurality opinion 
agreeing that ``[t]here is simply no credible argument that this 
type of credit reporting requires special protection to ensure that 
debate on public issues will be uninhibited, robust, and wide 
open'') (cleaned up); id. at 764 (Burger, C.J., concurring in the 
judgment) (agreeing); id. at 774 (White, J., concurring in the 
judgment) (agreeing that ``the defamatory publication in this case 
does not deal with a matter of public importance'' warranting First 
Amendment protection). See also Trans Union LLC v. FTC, 295 F.3d 42, 
46, 52-53 (D.C. Cir. 2002) (upholding the constitutionality of the 
FTC's regulations implementing the privacy protections of the Gramm-
Leach-Bliley Act by restricting financial institutions' use of any 
personally identifying information obtained by financial 
institutions in connection with providing financial products or 
services to a consumer); Trans Union Corp. v. FTC (Trans Union I), 
245 F.3d 809, 818 (D.C. Cir. 2001), reh'g denied; Trans Union Corp. 
v. FTC (Trans Union II), 267 F.3d 1138, 1142 (D.C. Cir. 2001), cert. 
denied, 536 U.S. 915 (2002); Boelter v. Hearst Commc'ns, Inc. 
(Hearst II), 269 F. Supp. 3d 172, 177-78 (S.D.N.Y. 2017); Boelter v. 
Hearst Commc'ns, Inc. (Hearst I), 192 F. Supp. 3d 427, 445 (S.D.N.Y. 
2016); Boelter v. Advance Magazine Publishers, Inc., 210 F. Supp. 3d 
579, 599 (S.D.N.Y. 2016); Nat'l Cable & Telecommc'ns Ass'n v. FCC, 
555 F.3d 996, 1001 (D.C. Cir. 2009) (restrictions on disclosure of 
customer proprietary network information); Brooks v. Thomson Reuters 
Co., No. 21-cv-01418-EMC, 2021 WL 3621837, at *1, *15 (N.D. Cal. 
Aug. 16, 2021); King v. Gen. Info. Servs., Inc., 903 F. Supp. 2d 
303, 309-11 (E.D. Pa. 2012).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    In sum, the Department's definition appropriately ``balances 
IEEPA's competing purposes'' in ``restricting material support for 
hostile regimes while encouraging the robust interchange of 
information.'' \150\ The export of non-expressive data (including the 
sensitive personal data that the rule regulates) does not implicate the 
exchange of ideas and expression that the Berman Amendment protects. At 
the same time, allowing sensitive personal data to fall into the hands 
of countries of concern would directly support and enable their 
attempts to undermine national security, including through traditional 
and economic espionage, surveillance, sabotage, blackmail, and other 
nefarious activities. Moreover, these categories of sensitive personal 
data are already subject to some existing government regulation in the 
context of domestic commercial transactions. It would be unreasonable 
to interpret IEEPA--a statute that is specifically designed to address 
foreign threats to national security, foreign policy, and the economy--
as disallowing regulation of the same commercial transactions when they 
involve transferring such data to a country of concern.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \150\ United States v. Amirnazmi, 645 F.3d 564, 587 (3d Cir. 
2011).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    In the NPRM, the Department explained that, under its 
interpretation, expressive content and associated metadata that is not 
sensitive personal data would be categorically outside the scope of the 
definition of ``sensitive personal data'' and thus outside the scope of 
the regulations, regardless of the type of activity (or transaction) 
involved. The Department asked for further comments on this issue, and 
several commenters suggested that further protections for metadata 
ordinarily included in expressive materials, such as geolocation data 
embedded in digital photographs, were warranted. The Department agrees 
that it is appropriate to provide further protections for the export of 
metadata that is ordinarily associated with expressive materials, or 
that is reasonably necessary to enable the transmission or 
dissemination of expressive materials, to avoid unintended effects on 
the export of information or informational materials. Such metadata is 
therefore categorically excluded from the rule's scope, as reflected in 
revisions to the definition of ``sensitive personal data'' in Sec.  
202.249. The rule would still properly reach metadata that is not 
ordinarily associated with expressive materials or not reasonably 
necessary to its transmission or dissemination because regulating that 
data does not impermissibly prohibit the export of the expressive 
material itself. This prevents the abuse of expressive materials as a 
conduit for transmitting unrelated government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data. The Department reiterates that other aspects 
of the rule (such as bulk thresholds or the definition of ``covered 
data transaction'') also protect the dissemination of expressive 
content and its associated metadata.

[[Page 1675]]

    To the extent that any parties believe that the sensitive personal 
data involved in their covered data transactions may nevertheless 
qualify as ``information or informational materials'' that is exempt 
under 50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(3), they can seek clarification using the 
administrative processes for seeking an advisory opinion or applying 
for a specific license before engaging in the transaction.
2. Section 202.504--Official Business of the United States Government
    The NPRM proposed exempting data transactions to the extent that 
they are for (1) the conduct of the official business of the United 
States Government by its employees, grantees, or contractors; (2) any 
authorized activity of any United States Government department or 
agency (including an activity that is performed by a Federal depository 
institution or credit union supervisory agency in the capacity of 
receiver or conservator); or (3) transactions conducted pursuant to a 
grant, contract, or other agreement entered into with the United States 
Government. Most notably, this exemption exempts grantees and 
contractors of Federal departments and agencies, including the 
Department of Health and Human Services (``HHS''), the Department of 
Veterans Affairs, the National Science Foundation, and the Department 
of Defense, so that those agencies can pursue grant-based and contract-
based conditions to address risks that countries of concern can access 
sensitive personal data in transactions related to their agencies' own 
grants and contracts--as laid out in section 3(b) of the Order--without 
subjecting those grantees and contractors to dual regulation.
    Two commenters noted that the rule would hinder scientific progress 
by preventing international collaboration with scientists who are 
primarily resident in countries of concern because those scientists 
would no longer be able to leverage large population neuroscience 
datasets funded by the National Institutes of Health (``NIH''). One of 
these commenters noted that the proposed rule could impose unwanted 
administrative burdens on U.S. researchers by creating roadblocks to 
data sharing and thereby potentially decrease the global 
competitiveness of U.S. genetics research and related applications. 
These concerns are unsupported. As explained in parts IV.D.2, IV.D.4, 
and IV.D.8-10 of this preamble, the rule regulates certain categories 
of commercial transactions and does not prohibit or restrict United 
States research in a country of concern, or research partnerships or 
collaboration with covered persons, that does not involve the exchange 
of payment or other consideration as part of a covered data 
transaction. In addition, the rule includes exemptions and provisions 
meant to streamline compliance and reduce the impact on researchers. 
The rule exempts expressive information and personal communications, 
such as the posting or publication of health-related research data 
online by individual researchers. To the extent that such covered data 
transactions are conducted pursuant to a grant, contract, or other 
agreement entered into with the United States Government, that activity 
would be exempt from the prohibitions and restrictions of the rule. And 
the rule exempts the activities of the United States Government, such 
as providing access to its own databases. The rule exempts data that is 
lawfully publicly available or available in unrestricted, open-access 
repositories and other widely distributed media, such as databases 
freely available to the scientific community. Other exemptions include 
clinical care data and post-marketing surveillance data needed for FDA 
authorization, submissions of regulatory approval data to research or 
market drugs, biological products, devices, and combination products, 
and the sharing of data as part of international agreements (including 
those addressing pandemic preparedness and global health surveillance). 
The Department therefore does not believe that the rule will undermine 
the global competitiveness of the U.S. genetics sector significantly, 
if at all.
    To the contrary, the rule is intended to limit the ability of 
countries of concern and covered persons to use commercial means to 
obtain and exploit access to government-related or bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data. Safeguarding government-related data and bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data is crucial for maintaining trust and 
competitiveness within the research community. These regulations will 
foster international collaboration and strengthen the global standing 
of U.S. researchers. Furthermore, the rule does not prevent the sharing 
of data with countries that are not countries of concern. It only 
requires that U.S. persons require foreign persons that are not 
countries of concern or covered persons, and with which the U.S. 
persons engage in covered data transactions involving data brokerage to 
contractually require that the foreign person refrain from subsequent 
data transactions involving data brokerage of the same data with a 
country of concern or covered person, as described in Sec.  
202.302(a)(1). Foreign persons that obtain covered data from U.S. 
persons should be contractually prohibited from onward transfer of this 
data to countries of concern or covered persons.
    The rule's prohibitions and restrictions, as limited by this and 
other exemptions, are considerably less onerous and wholly different in 
kind than those imposed by certain other countries. For example, a PRC 
set of laws and regulations supposedly aimed at protecting national 
security, data security, and privacy impose strict controls on 
transfers of certain broad categories of data collected or produced in 
China--including vaguely defined categories like ``important data''--to 
places outside of China, effectively localizing such data. To the 
extent that these authorities do not prohibit cross-border transfers of 
such data outright, they generally subject such transfers to review, 
approval, and security assessments conducted by PRC government 
regulators and require that the recipient be contractually obligated to 
follow security measures prescribed by the government.\151\ Transfers 
of scientific data outside of China are also subject to government 
review and approval. In addition, the European Union's (``EU'') General 
Data Protection Regulation (``GDPR''), which the EU calls ``the 
toughest privacy and security law in the world,'' \152\ imposes 
restrictions on the transfer of personal data outside the European 
Economic Area that are designed to ensure that the level of protection 
of individuals

[[Page 1676]]

granted by the GDPR remains the same, among other restrictions.\153\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \151\ These laws include the National Security Law of the 
People's Republic of China (promulgated by the Standing Committee of 
the National People's Congress, July 1, 2015, effective July 1, 
2015), see Exh. A to Newman Decl., supra note 111; the Cybersecurity 
Law of the People's Republic of China (promulgated by the Standing 
Committee of the National People's Congress, Nov. 7, 2016, effective 
June 1, 2017), see Exh. B to Newman Decl., supra note 111; the Anti-
Terrorism Law of the People's Republic of China (promulgated by the 
Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, Dec. 27, 2015, 
effective Jan. 1, 2016, amended Apr. 27, 2018), see Exh. C to Newman 
Decl., supra note 111; the National Intelligence Law of the People's 
Republic of China (promulgated by the Standing Committee of the 
National People's Congress, June 27, 2017, effective June 28, 2017, 
amended Apr. 27, 2018), see Exh. D to Newman Decl., supra note 111; 
and the Counter-Espionage Law of the People's Republic of China 
(promulgated by the Standing Committee of the National People's 
Congress, Nov. 1, 2014, amended Apr. 26, 2023, effective July 1, 
2023), see Exh. E to Newman Decl., supra note 111.
    \152\ Ben Wolford, What Is GDPR, the EU's New Data Protection 
Law?, GDPR.eu, https://gdpr.eu/what-is-gdpr/ [https://perma.cc/3L4B-CTPQ].
    \153\ See Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament 
and of the Council of Apr. 27, 2016, On the Protection of Natural 
Persons with Regard to the Processing of Personal Data and on the 
Free Movement of Such Data, and Repealing Directive 95/46/EC, art. 
44; see also International data transfers, European Data Protection, 
https://www.edpb.europa.eu/sme-data-protection-guide/international-data-transfers_en [https://perma.cc/G5A3-4HEB] (``In a nutshell, the 
GDPR imposes restrictions on the transfer of personal data outside 
the EEA, to non-EEA countries or international organisations, to 
ensure that the level of protection of individuals granted by the 
GDPR remains the same.'').
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Some commenters requested clarity about projects receiving both 
federal and non-Federal funding, as well as the extent to which the 
exemption would include transactions conducted pursuant to a grant, 
contract, or other agreement with Federal departments and agencies to 
conduct and share the results of federally funded research that also 
involved grants, donations, or other funding from non-Federal entities, 
like private institutions or donors. The Department has added new 
examples in Sec.  202.504 to clarify that transactions conducted 
pursuant to a grant, contract, or other agreement with Federal 
departments and agencies are exempt, even if those transactions also 
involve funding from non-Federal entities.
3. Section 202.505--Financial Services
    The NPRM proposed exempting the transfer of personal financial data 
or covered personal identifiers incidental to the purchase and sale of 
goods and services (such as the purchase, sale, or transfer of consumer 
products and services through online shopping or e-commerce 
marketplaces, while still prohibiting these marketplaces from 
conducting data transactions that involve data brokerage), as well as 
exempting the transfer of personal financial data or covered personal 
identifiers for the provision or processing of payments or funds 
transfers.
    Commenters were generally supportive of the Department's inclusion 
of a financial services exemption. Comments requested clarifications 
about the exemption's scope and outer peripheries, requested changes to 
its examples or requested new examples, and suggested changes that 
would expand its applicability beyond data transactions that are 
ordinarily incident to and part of the provision of financial services. 
The Department has made many of these changes and clarifications to the 
exemption and its examples in response to these comments. Some 
commenters raised issues that failed to appreciate the applicability of 
the regulations' other exemptions or provisions and made suggestions 
that would be redundant or unnecessary if accepted. Other commenters 
mistakenly treated the list of financial services as exhaustive and 
failed to appreciate that it is an exemplary list. Some commenters 
failed to appropriately consider how the suggestions or observations 
they put forth would address the national security risks the Order was 
intended to mitigate. Other commenters failed to explain why it was 
essential in the context of their suggestions that covered persons or 
countries of concern access government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data.
    In the NPRM, the Department also shared that it was considering 
whether and how the financial services exemption should apply to 
employment and vendor agreements between U.S. financial-services firms 
and covered persons where the underlying financial services provided do 
not involve a country of concern. As the Department explained, under 
this proposed exemption, U.S. persons would be required to evaluate 
whether a particular data transaction (such as a transaction involving 
data brokerage or a vendor, employment, or investment agreement) is 
``ordinarily incident to and part of'' the provision of financial 
services such that it is treated as an exempt transaction.\154\ The 
Department shared two new proposed examples and sought public input as 
to whether to treat those examples as exempt transactions or restricted 
transactions.\155\ Specifically, the Department sought public comment 
on the extent to which it is reasonable, necessary, and typical 
practice for U.S. financial-services firms to hire covered persons as 
employees or vendors with access to bulk U.S. sensitive personal data 
as part of providing financial services that do not involve a country 
of concern; why U.S. financial-services firms hire covered persons 
instead of non-covered persons in those circumstances; and any 
additional compliance costs that would be incurred if the transactions 
in these examples were treated as restricted transactions. One of the 
new examples proposed in Sec.  202.505(b)(12) of the NPRM featured a 
U.S. wealth-management services company that collects bulk personal 
financial data on U.S. clients, appoints a citizen of a country of 
concern located in a country of concern to its board, and allows this 
board member access to the bulk personal financial data in connection 
with the board's data security and cybersecurity responsibilities.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \154\ Cf., e.g., 31 CFR 560.405(c) (discussing the OFAC 
exemption for transactions ``ordinarily incident to a licensed 
transaction'' as applied to scenarios involving the provision of 
transportation services to or from Iran); 31 CFR 515.533 n.1 
(discussing the OFAC exemption for transactions ``ordinarily 
incident to'' a licensed transaction as applied to scenarios 
involving the licensed export of items to any person in Cuba); 
Letter from R. Richard Newcomb, Dir., U.S. Dep't of Treas., Off. of 
Foreign Assets Control, Re: Iran: Travel Exemption (Nov. 25, 2003), 
https://ofac.treasury.gov/media/7926/download?inline [https://perma.cc/3VRL-X886] (discussing the OFAC exemption for transactions 
``ordinarily incident to'' travel as applied to scenarios involving 
the use of airline-service providers from a sanctioned 
jurisdiction).
    \155\ 89 FR 86135.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter stated that, for banking organizations, it would 
treat that example as ``ordinarily incident to and part of'' the 
provision of financial services because board oversight of a bank's 
programs is integral to its required governance procedures. However, 
the commenter also emphasized that a director carries out an oversight 
function with respect to a firm's security program as a core component 
of risk management, is not involved in day-to-day management 
activities, and does not have a need to access bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data to faithfully carry out his or her roles and 
responsibilities. In explaining the commenter's rationale that a 
director would not need access to this data to perform his or her 
duties, the commenter overlooked one of the key facts in the example--
that the board director could access bulk personal financial data of 
the company's U.S. person clients. Treating this board director's 
employment as a restricted transaction would only mean implementing the 
security requirements, including data-level requirements that mitigate 
the risk that the director may access data that is linkable, 
identifiable, unencrypted or decryptable using commonly available 
technologies, and which the commenter confirms the director does not 
need access to. It does not prohibit the board director's employment. 
Accordingly, the Department has decided to treat the transactions in 
the proposed examples as restricted transactions because, as stated in 
the NPRM, it does not believe that an employment agreement (including 
the hiring of board members) or a vendor agreement that gives a covered 
person access to bulk U.S. sensitive personal data is a reasonable and 
typical practice in providing the underlying financial services that do 
not otherwise involve covered persons or a country of concern. See 
Sec. Sec.  202.505(b)(3)

[[Page 1677]]

and 202.505(b)(12). These transactions therefore appear to pose the 
same unacceptable national security risk regardless of the kinds of 
underlying services provided by the U.S. person.
    Commenters suggested that financial institutions engage in 
operational and compliance activities that are uncommon to other 
sectors. Because of this, the commenters believe there may be confusion 
on the applicability of the exemptions for financial services and 
corporate groups transaction. To address this supposed confusion, the 
commenters recommended the expansion of the financial services 
exemption to include data transactions that are ordinarily incident to 
and part of the operations of financial services entities regulated by 
Federal or State banking or insurance regulators, without limitation. 
The Department declines to adopt this suggestion. First, the suggestion 
is too broad and appears to fully exempt financial-services entities 
(i.e., their operations) from the regulations, even if they engage in 
the same covered data transactions that pose the unacceptable risks 
addressed by the Order (such as selling bulk U.S. sensitive personal 
data to a covered person). As the NPRM explained, the rule takes an 
activity-based approach, not an entity-based approach, because it is 
these commercial activities (i.e., transactions) that pose an 
unacceptable national security risk, regardless of the kind of entity 
that engages in them. A new Example 6 was added in Sec.  202.506(b)(6) 
to address the issue of the overlap between these exemptions. There is 
no tension or confusion between these independent exemptions because 
any combination of the exemptions can apply, depending on the 
circumstances of any given matter. In addition, to the extent that a 
financial-services entity (or any other U.S. person) engages in data 
transactions that are required or authorized by Federal law (e.g., the 
Bank Secrecy Act), those transactions could also be exempt under Sec.  
202.507.
    Similarly, commenters requested that the financial services 
exemption be expanded to expressly include data transfers arising from 
a financial institution's regulatory obligations. This change appears 
unnecessary. The exemption in Sec.  202.507 already authorizes ``data 
transactions to the extent they are required or authorized by Federal 
law.'' Example 1 in Sec.  202.507(d)(1) addresses the commenters' 
concerns by making clear that a U.S. bank or other financial 
institution can engage ``in a covered data transaction with a covered 
person that is ordinarily incident to and part of ensuring compliance 
with U.S. laws and regulations (such as OFAC sanctions and anti-money 
laundering programs required by the Bank Secrecy Act).'' Some 
commenters also mentioned that the Department may be inadvertently 
limiting the relevant scope of exempted data transactions in Sec.  
202.505 to those arising from securities-based financial services 
subject to Securities Exchange Commission (``SEC'') jurisdiction. The 
list of financial services in the exemption is exemplary, not 
exhaustive, given that the defined term ``including'' precedes the 
list. However, to avoid the possibility of any substantial 
misunderstanding as to whether activities related to commodity markets 
can be financial services, the Department has added ``securities and 
commodity markets'' to the parenthetical in Sec.  202.505(a). The 
Department also confirms that financial services include futures, 
options, and derivatives subject to the jurisdiction of the Commodity 
Futures Trading Commission (``CFTC''), security-based swaps, and the 
activities of Futures Commission Merchants, commodity trading advisors, 
introducing brokers, and other CFTC-regulated entities. Parties that 
face continued challenges determining whether their activities are 
financial services will be able to file requests for advisory opinions 
with the Department after the effective date of the regulations.
    These same commenters were also concerned that the exemption may 
not reach transactions involving mortgage-backed securities and other 
asset-backed securities, which could curtail the ability of parties in 
countries of concern from buying securities backed by U.S. mortgages 
and other assets. This comment appears to be based on a 
misunderstanding. As the Example 2 at Sec.  202.505(b)(2) makes clear, 
it is ordinarily incident to and part of securitizing and selling 
asset-backed obligations (such as mortgage and nonmortgage loans) to a 
covered person for a U.S. bank to provide bulk U.S. sensitive personal 
data to the covered person. As such, this activity would be exempt, and 
no changes seem necessary.
    Some commenters suggested that cybersecurity services may be 
considered ancillary to processing payments and funds transfers, based 
on the view that such services are a form of risk mitigation and 
prevention. Commenters also proposed the addition of a new example to 
clarify the limitations in Example 4 at Sec.  202.505(b)(4) regarding 
product development in what appears to be fraud detection and 
prevention models. The Department agrees that cybersecurity services 
performed in conjunction with the processing of payments and funds 
transfers can be ordinarily incident to the provision of financial 
services and thus exempt to the extent that they are performed as part 
of the processing of payments and funds transfers. The Department, 
however, declines to extend the exemption to product development or 
adopt an additional example specific to product development. The 
comment does not explain why bulk U.S. sensitive personal data needs to 
be accessed in a country of concern or by a covered person to develop 
such products as part of providing financial services in a country of 
concern or to a covered person. The Department makes no further changes 
regarding this issue.
    Several commenters requested clarifications to Example 10 in Sec.  
202.505(b)(10). The commenters suggested a clarification that the 
financial services exemption covers lawful regulatory requests from 
countries of concern directed at any financial services provider, not 
just banks. The financial services exemption is not limited to any 
specific entity and applies to any transaction by any entity that is 
ordinarily incident to and part of providing financial services, and 
thus no change is necessary. Nevertheless, as clarification, the 
Department adopts the suggestion to broaden Example 10 from ``bank'' to 
``financial services provider'' and adds language showing that sharing 
financial data as part of routine regulatory reporting requirements is 
ordinarily incident to the provision of financial services and is 
therefore exempt.
    Commenters also noted that the current version of the financial 
services exemption is ambiguous as to whether it covers the transfer of 
personal financial data or covered personal identifiers incidental to 
the purchase and sale of goods and services, since such exempted 
transactions must be ``ordinarily incident to and part of the provision 
of financial services'' and, as such, the text of the rule appears to 
narrowly focus on financial-services institutions or payment processors 
rather than sellers in those marketplaces. This comment misapplies the 
exemption. The exemption applies to any transaction that is ordinarily 
incident to and part of financial services, which includes any 
transaction that is ordinarily incident to and part of the transfer of 
personal financial data or covered personal identifiers for the 
purchase and sale of goods and services. As Example 5 in Sec.  
202.505(b)(5) makes clear, the financial services exemption is not only 
applicable to the activities of

[[Page 1678]]

financial institutions; that example shows that the exemption can apply 
to a U.S. company operating an online marketplace.
    Commenters also suggested renaming Sec.  202.505 as ``financial 
services and consumer transactions for goods or services'' and making 
the following modifications: in Sec.  202.505(a), before ``, 
including,'' insert ``or purchase and sale of goods or services.'' The 
Department declines to implement these changes, which appear 
unnecessary in light of the rule's text and examples, and which may 
inadvertently broaden the exemption to cover vendor agreements that the 
rule intends to regulate.
4. Section 202.506--Corporate Group Transactions
    The NPRM proposed exempting covered data transactions to the extent 
that they are (1) between a U.S. person and its subsidiary or affiliate 
located in (or otherwise subject to the ownership, direction, 
jurisdiction, or control of) a country of concern; and (2) ordinarily 
incident to and part of administrative or ancillary business operations 
(such as sharing employees' covered personal identifiers for human-
resources purposes; payroll transactions, such as the payment of 
salaries and pensions to overseas employees or contractors; paying 
business taxes or fees; purchasing business permits or licenses; 
sharing data with auditors and law firms for regulatory compliance; and 
risk management).
    One commenter requested that the Department clarify its definitions 
of ``subsidiary,'' ``affiliate,'' and ``branch.'' Although these terms 
are not defined in the rule, the Department provided clarification on 
their meaning in section IV.C.4 of the NPRM.\156\ The commenter does 
not identify any meaningful ambiguity or specific uncertainty about the 
application of these terms, which are commonly used and applied terms 
throughout other national security programs. As a result, the 
Department does not believe it is necessary or appropriate at this time 
to define these terms. To the extent that ambiguities or uncertainty 
about the application of these terms arises in the future, the 
Department can issue general guidance, and the public can seek advisory 
opinions on their application to specific transactions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \156\ 89 FR 86136.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Numerous commenters requested that the Department broaden the scope 
of data transactions covered by this exemption to cover, as one 
commenter put it, ``more corporate substantive operations-related 
activity,'' rather than only data transactions that are ordinarily 
incident to and part of administrative or ancillary business 
operations. For example, one commenter suggested that the scope of this 
exemption be broadened ``to encompass a broader range of necessary 
business activities beyond routine administrative support.'' Similarly, 
multiple commenters requested that this exemption be expanded to cover 
data sharing required for global business operations or services. Other 
commenters similarly requested that this exemption be expanded to cover 
any data transfers ``necessary to a company's business,'' even if such 
activity is not ordinarily incident to and part of administrative or 
ancillary business operations, or to ``all instances where a subsidiary 
in a country of concern receives data from a U.S.-based parent.'' The 
Department declines to incorporate these suggestions because they would 
not adequately mitigate the threats posed by access to government-
related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data by a country of 
concern or covered person.
    In addition, numerous commenters requested that the Department make 
clear that certain specific data transactions or activities identified 
by the commenters, including what some commenters referred to as 
``routine'' and ``low-risk'' transactions, are included within the 
scope of this exemption. These included internal collaboration and 
review platforms; pricing and billing systems; customer and vendor 
relationship management tools, including technical assistance centers; 
expense monitoring and reporting; recruiting and other activities 
related to identifying and selecting job applicants; contingent 
workforce management; and financial planning, analysis, and management 
activities.
    The list of ancillary business activities in the exemption is not 
exhaustive and therefore, some of these activities, such as expense 
monitoring and reporting, are likely already covered by the scope of 
this exemption. As such, the Department declines to incorporate these 
suggestions, as doing so is unnecessary. Additionally, while some of 
the suggested transactions may be routine, it is unclear why these 
functions would need to be utilized or performed by a covered person or 
are necessary for a company to operate in a country of concern. The 
Department anticipates addressing which activities fit within the 
exemption through public guidance issued after publication of the final 
rule.
    One commenter requested that the Department include in the 
exemption transfers of government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data to corporate affiliates in countries of concern for 
routine research and development purposes and not related to other 
exemptions, including Sec. Sec.  202.510 and 202.511. The Department 
declines to adopt this recommendation. This commenter did not provide 
enough information for the Department to assess the scope or economic, 
scientific, or humanitarian value of any such transactions, nor the 
likelihood that such transactions would otherwise satisfy the 
definition of a ``covered data transaction'' to fall within the scope 
of the rule. In light of the substantial risks posed by country of 
concern access to government-related data and bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data described in part II of this preamble and in the 
NPRM,\157\ the Department declines to expand the corporate group 
transactions exemption to include data transactions involving 
government-related data and bulk U.S. sensitive personal data with 
corporate affiliates of U.S. companies in countries of concern for 
routine research and development purposes.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \157\ 89 FR 86118-19.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter reiterated their comment on the ANPRM seeking 
clarification that the corporate group transactions exemption would 
cover all employees of a U.S. entity and its affiliates in countries of 
concern, as well as employees of trusted vendors. The corporate group 
transactions exemption applies to transactions, not to individuals. As 
discussed in the NPRM, this exemption may apply to situations in which 
employees of a U.S. company's affiliate located in a country of concern 
are provided with access to covered data.\158\ Additionally, for the 
reasons discussed in section IV.C.4 of the NPRM,\159\ the Department 
declines to broaden the corporate group transactions exemption to 
include suppliers and other third-party vendors. This commenter also 
reiterated their comment on the ANPRM seeking confirmation that 
business offices in a particular country of concern that have access to 
basic company information, such as a company staff directory, would be 
covered by this exemption. This scenario is discussed in section IV.C.4 
of the NPRM.\160\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \158\ 89 FR 86218.
    \159\ 89 FR 86136.
    \160\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Multiple commenters requested that the Department include an 
example in Sec.  202.506 involving a U.S. financial-services provider 
that has a subsidiary located in a country of concern. In this

[[Page 1679]]

example, customers of the U.S. company conduct financial transactions 
in the country of concern, and customers of the foreign subsidiary 
conduct financial transactions in the United States. To perform 
customer service functions related to these financial transactions, the 
foreign subsidiary accesses bulk U.S. sensitive personal data--
specifically, personal financial data.
    The Department agrees that the corporate group transactions 
exemption would apply to the foreign subsidiary's access to the 
personal financial data under these circumstances because it is 
ordinarily incident to and part of the provision of customer support. 
The Department has added this example to Sec.  202.506(b). The 
Department also notes that the transaction described by these 
commenters would be covered by the financial services exemption.
    One commenter asked the Department to clarify whether the corporate 
group transactions exemption would apply to a situation in which a U.S. 
financial-services provider has a foreign affiliate that is also a 
financial-services provider. In this scenario, the two entities have a 
centralized risk-monitoring application used by global fraud risk-
control employees to effectively monitor fraud risk across the 
enterprise. The U.S. company allows the foreign affiliate's employees 
conducting fraud risk monitoring to access bulk U.S. sensitive personal 
data to the extent reasonably necessary to ensure effective enterprise-
wide risk monitoring. The Department agrees that the corporate group 
transactions exemption would apply to this scenario. While the 
transaction is between a U.S. company and its affiliate, effective 
enterprise-wide risk monitoring is ordinarily incident to and is an 
ancillary part of providing financial services.
    This commenter also asked the Department to clarify whether this 
exemption would apply to a situation in which a U.S. company has a 
foreign affiliate that is a covered person and that provides customer 
support services to U.S. customers as part of global customer support 
operations. In this scenario, the U.S. company provides the foreign 
affiliate with access to bulk U.S. sensitive personal data to the 
extent necessary for the affiliate to provide customer support. The 
commenter considered the foreign affiliate's access to bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data to be covered by the corporate group 
transactions exemption because, the commenter believed, such access was 
ordinarily incident to and part of the provision of customer support.
    The Department does not agree that the foreign subsidiary's access 
to bulk U.S. sensitive personal data under the circumstances described 
by this commenter would be covered by the corporate group transactions 
exemption. Specifically, the Department does not consider the foreign 
subsidiary's access to the bulk U.S. sensitive personal data to be 
ordinarily incident to and part of the provision of customer support 
because, in the scenario described by the commenter, the foreign 
subsidiary appears to be providing customer support to the U.S. 
company's customers in all instances--including instances in which 
customer support is being provided to U.S. persons located in the 
United States--and not just in instances that involve a country of 
concern or a covered person. This view aligns with the Department's 
view on the inapplicability of the financial- services exemption to 
vendor agreements where the underlying financial services being 
provided by the vendor do not involve a country of concern or a covered 
person, as discussed in section IV.C.3 of the NPRM \161\ and Example 4 
in Sec.  202.505(b).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \161\ 89 FR 86135.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter requested that the Department clarify that 
``potential incidental access to physical facilities'' containing 
covered data would not be considered ``access'' to such data. This 
commenter provided an example in which a counterparty employs a repair 
technician who is not authorized to access facilities that transmit 
U.S. sensitive personal data ``but theoretically could obtain 
unauthorized access.''
    This comment lacks the specificity needed to justify a change or 
evaluate a suggestion and does not provide support or analysis. As 
discussed in the NPRM, the definition of ``access'' is intentionally 
broad.\162\ Section 202.201 of the rule defines ``access'' as ``logical 
or physical access, including the ability to obtain, read, copy, 
decrypt, edit, divert, release, affect, alter the state of, or 
otherwise view or receive, in any form, including through information 
systems, information technology systems, cloud computing platforms, 
networks, security systems, equipment, or software'' (emphasis added). 
The commentor has not offered any suggestion for a way to distinguish 
between incidental or inadvertent access in a manner that would 
minimize the national security risk that this rule seeks to address. 
Finally, the CISA security requirements contemplate organizational, 
system, and data-level security requirements that are meant to prevent 
access by covered persons or countries of concern to data that is 
linkable, identifiable, unencrypted, or decryptable using commonly 
available technology. For these reasons, the Department declines this 
commenter's request.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \162\ 89 FR 86122.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter urged the Department to remove or lessen the 
requirement in this exemption that additional access protocols be 
established to ensure that employees in countries of concern only have 
access to pseudonymized, anonymized, or de-identified data. This 
commenter noted that many companies have already instituted robust 
security and data governance measures, as well as mechanisms for intra-
affiliate data transfers, and may have contractual or other legal 
obligations to comply with when storing or safeguarding data. The 
application of this exemption does not require that data be 
pseudonymized, anonymized, or de-identified. As noted in section IV.C.4 
of the NPRM, however, a non-exempt employment agreement that qualifies 
as a restricted transaction would be subject to the CISA security 
requirements incorporated in Sec.  202.248.\163\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \163\ 89 FR 86136.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    This commenter also remarked that Examples 4 and 12 in Sec. Sec.  
202.505(b)(4) and 202.505(b)(12) (the financial services exemption) 
should be covered by the corporate group transactions exemption. This 
commenter provided no support or analysis for this assertion, and the 
comment lacks the specificity needed to justify a change or evaluate a 
suggestion. There is no indication in these examples that they involve 
data transactions between a U.S. person and its subsidiary or affiliate 
located in (or otherwise subject to the ownership, direction, 
jurisdiction, or control of) a country of concern.
    One commenter asked the Department to clarify whether this 
exemption would apply to data transfers that are necessary for 
business-data analysis purposes, noting that it would be burdensome for 
a company to have to implement a different data analysis system since a 
shared system is both vital to operations and most cost-effective. This 
comment lacks the specificity needed to justify a change or evaluate a 
suggestion. In addition, the business-data analysis mentioned by this 
commenter appears not to be ancillary or administrative activity but 
rather part of a company's core business activities, such as product 
development and research. The Department declines to exempt such

[[Page 1680]]

activities as explained in the NPRM and part IV.D of this preamble.
5. Section 202.507--Transactions Required or Authorized by Federal Law 
or International Agreements, or Necessary for Compliance With Federal 
Law
    The NPRM proposed exempting covered data transactions to the extent 
that they are required or authorized by Federal law, international 
agreements or specified global health and pandemic preparedness 
measures, or are necessary for compliance with Federal law.
    One commenter expressed concern that companies could exploit this 
exemption by relying on data transfer rules contained in expansive 
digital trade agreements. This commenter expressed alarm about the 
possibility that certain provisions of such agreements, which reflect 
commitments to cross-border data transfers, could be used as a basis to 
circumvent the prohibitions and restrictions in this rule, especially 
since the list of international agreements in Sec.  202.507(a) is not 
exhaustive. Accordingly, this commenter requested that the Department 
clarify that this exemption does not cover transactions required or 
authorized by international trade agreements.
    The Department appreciates this commenter's recognition of the 
nexus between the provisions in digital free trade agreements, on the 
one hand, and the national security risk that the Order and this rule 
seek to address, on the other hand. The Department agrees and 
reiterates that the exemption contained in Sec.  202.507(a) for sharing 
data pursuant to international agreements would not allow for the 
sharing of government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data 
with a country of concern pursuant to the World Trade Organization's 
General Agreement on Trade in Services or other trade agreements. As 
explained in the NPRM, digital-trade agreements and arrangements that 
merely facilitate international commercial data flows--such as the 
Global Cross-Border Privacy Rules and Global Privacy Recognition for 
Processors Systems of the Global Cross-Border Privacy Rules Forum and 
the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (``APEC'') Cross-Border Privacy 
Rules and APEC Privacy Recognition for Processors Systems--are outside 
the scope of the exemption for international agreements. As the NPRM 
explained, these arrangements consist of frameworks for coordinating 
national regulatory measures, prohibit data localization, and do not 
facilitate the sharing of data between the United States and a country 
of concern.\164\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \164\ See 89 FR 86136-37.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Another commenter suggested that this exemption be expanded to 
cover data transactions not only to the extent that they are required 
or authorized by Federal law, but also to the extent that they 
``facilitate or otherwise relate to compliance'' with Federal law or 
other regulatory obligation. This commenter noted that some financial 
institutions may institute compliance programs that go beyond what is 
specifically required by Federal law in order to help ensure compliance 
with such laws or other regulatory obligations.
    The Department appreciates that some financial institutions may 
impose internal rules and requirements that are stricter than those 
established by Federal law in order to help ensure compliance. The 
commenter's suggestion to extend this exemption to data transactions to 
the extent that they ``facilitate or otherwise relate to'' compliance 
with Federal law or other regulatory obligations, however, lacks the 
specificity needed to justify a change. It does not, for example, 
identify any specific non-exempt covered data transactions with 
countries of concern or covered persons that go beyond what is required 
or authorized by Federal law but that would be prohibited or 
restricted. Accordingly, the Department declines to modify this 
exemption.
    Some commenters requested that the Department include a separate 
mechanism in Sec.  202.507(b) for researchers to share data rapidly 
during a public health crisis, if such sharing is not otherwise 
authorized by the specific mechanisms identified in that section. The 
Department declines to adopt this recommendation. As explained in parts 
IV.B.2 and IV.D.9 of this preamble, the rule does not prohibit or 
restrict the sharing of data by researchers or others that does not 
involve the exchange of payment or other consideration as part of a 
covered data transaction. In addition, the rule already has 
exemptions--including for sharing data as authorized or required by the 
International Health Regulations (which address data sharing for public 
health events and emergencies), the Pandemic Influenza Preparedness and 
Response Framework, the Global Influenza Surveillance and Response 
System, and other health-related international agreements--that allow 
data sharing in these circumstances. Finally, general and specific 
licenses are available to the extent that the sharing of government-
related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data in these 
circumstances would involve non-exempt prohibited or restricted 
transactions.
6. Section 202.509--Telecommunications Services
    The NPRM proposed regulating exempt transactions that are 
ordinarily incident to and part of telecommunications services.
    Several commenters suggested that the Department expand the 
definition of ``telecommunications services'' in Sec.  202.252 to 
include voice and data communications over the internet. The Department 
agrees. Instead of limiting the scope of ``telecommunications 
services'' to the definition in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), the Department has 
adopted its own definition of the term to more appropriately cover 
present day communications for the purposes of the exemption in Sec.  
202.509. This new definition includes the provision of voice and data 
communications services regardless of format or mode of delivery such 
as communications services over IP, voice, cable, wireless, fiber, or 
other types of broadband. This definition is limited to communications 
services and does not reach services like cloud computing.
    One commenter recommended expanding the definition of 
``telecommunications services'' to include data transactions that are 
ordinarily incident to the function of communications networks, 
effectively creating an exemption for IP addresses. The Department 
appreciates that IP addresses are ubiquitously used to track users on 
the internet. However, the Department currently views IP addresses as 
an important listed identifier that can be used to track users and 
devices as a personal identifier as well as to provide precise 
geolocation data. Therefore, the Department declines to expand this 
exemption to include communications networks.
    Another commenter recommended expanding this exemption to include 
the provision of cybersecurity services, noting that network-based 
identifiers used in cybersecurity services function similarly and do 
not involve the personal data of users. While the Department 
appreciates the importance of cybersecurity services, the Department 
declines to make this suggested change. First, whether network-based 
identifiers themselves involve personal data is not the relevant 
inquiry. Network-based identifiers can be exploited, in combination 
with other listed identifiers, to harm national security in the ways 
identified in this preamble. Second, some network-based identifiers, 
such as ``IMEI'' numbers and

[[Page 1681]]

Integrated Circuit Card Identifiers (``ICCID'') are used in other 
contexts and often do contain other sensitive personal data. Third, the 
exemption already exempts transactions to the extent that they are 
ordinarily incident to and part of providing telecommunications 
services. The comment does not identify the specific non-exempt 
transactions with countries of concern or covered persons involving the 
provision of cybersecurity services that would be prohibited or 
restricted, nor does the comment explain why the sharing of government-
related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data with countries of 
concern or covered persons is an integral part of those transactions. 
Therefore, no changes were therefore made in response to this comment.
7. Section 202.510--Drug, Biological Product, and Medical Device 
Authorizations
    The NPRM exempted certain data transactions necessary to obtain and 
maintain regulatory approval from country of concern regulatory 
entities to market a drug, biological product, medical device, or 
combination product. The Department sought public comment on the scope 
of the exemption, including whether to authorize covered data 
transactions involving covered person vendors in countries of concern 
that are involved in submitting regulatory approval data on behalf of 
U.S. persons to country of concern regulators; the extent to which 
regulatory approval data includes personally identifiable information; 
and the definition of ``regulatory approval data.''
    This exemption in the final rule is limited to data that is de-
identified or pseudonymized consistent with FDA regulations; required 
by a regulatory entity to obtain or maintain authorization or approval 
to research or market a drug, biological product, device, or 
combination product (i.e., covered product); and reasonably necessary 
to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the covered product. For 
example, de-identified or pseudonymized data that is gathered in the 
course of a clinical investigation and would typically be required for 
FDA approval of a covered product would generally fall within the 
exemption. Conversely, clinical participants' precise geolocation data, 
even if required by a country of concern's regulations, typically would 
fall outside the scope of the exemption because such data is not 
reasonably necessary to evaluate covered product safety or 
effectiveness. One commenter identified some circumstances where such 
data might be relevant, such as when the data is collected by a 
wearable device, or when tracing contaminated or defective products. 
The Department appreciates this comment and agrees that the data 
necessary to evaluate safety or effectiveness may vary with 
circumstances. No change to the regulatory text is necessary, however, 
as the text already incorporates a ``reasonableness'' standard.
    One commenter pointed out that the preamble to the NPRM indicated 
that the exemption extended to data required to obtain or maintain 
``authorization or approval'' to ``research or market'' the specified 
products, whereas the proposed regulatory text did not include the term 
``authorization'' or ``research.'' The Department has revised the text 
of Sec.  202.510 to include both terms, consistent with its stated 
intent in the NPRM to exempt submissions to regulatory bodies to 
conduct certain medical research and consistent with the definition 
provided for the term ``regulatory approval data.''
    This commenter also sought clarification that the exemption applies 
to inspections by country of concern regulatory bodies and that, in 
these circumstances, the de-identification requirement should not 
apply. This commenters explained that regulatory bodies, including both 
the FDA and those in countries of concern, possess investigatory 
authority to more closely examine data related to clinical 
investigations or post-marketing activities, and that when they 
exercise this inspection authority, they ordinarily are granted access 
to all data--including data that has not been de-identified or 
pseudonymized--consistent with current FDA and foreign regulatory 
bodies' practices. The Department first confirms that regulatory 
inspections, when necessary to maintain authorization or approval to 
research or market a covered product, generally would fall within the 
scope of the exemption. The Department appreciates the comment 
regarding the release of unredacted, identifiable bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data in the context of these inspections; such data would 
generally fall outside the scope of the exemption, even when accessed 
as part of a regulatory inspection. The comment does not provide 
information on the frequency of these inspections by country of concern 
regulators, the extent of U.S. sensitive personal information that 
would be exposed, the manner in which inspectors or regulatory agencies 
obtain or retain that data, or who, as a practical matter, the relevant 
parties ordinarily would be. For example, the rule does not generally 
apply to transactions that do not involve a U.S. person; it is unclear 
from the information provided whether or how the rule would apply where 
the regulatory body conducts an investigation of an in-country clinic 
or vendor. Although the comment refers generally to the possibility and 
authority to conduct overseas inspections, the comment does not suggest 
that such inspections occur with any frequency. The Department is 
therefore not convinced that a broad regulatory exemption allowing 
country of concern regulators unrestricted access to bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data adequately accounts for the corresponding 
national security risks. The Department will continue to evaluate this 
concern, including the appropriateness of a general license.
    Several commenters sought clarification of whether ``key-coded'' or 
pseudonymized data would qualify as de-identified data under this 
provision (and under Sec.  202.511) and suggested that the Department 
align the requirement with the FDA's requirements for data submission. 
Commenters explained that pseudonymized data is used by researchers to 
enable, for example, longitudinal studies and data traceability. As 
these commenters recognize, the data submitted to the FDA typically 
does not include ``names and other information which would identify 
patients or research subjects,'' 21 CFR 20.63(b), while other 
provisions explain (for example) that certain submissions should 
``assign a unique code for identification of the patient,'' 21 CFR 
314.80(i), instead of using patient names. The Department appreciates 
these comments. The risks of re-identification when using pseudonymized 
or key-coded data are generally higher than when using fully de-
identified data. But given the importance of being able to associate 
patient data longitudinally, the FDA's practice in this regard, and the 
established industry protocols for preserving patient or subject 
anonymity, the Department has changed this provision--as well as the 
corresponding limitation to de-identified data in Sec.  202.511--to 
apply to both de-identified data and pseudonymized data as described in 
21 CFR 314.80(i). The Department recognizes that data collection and 
submission continue beyond the initial regulatory approval process, and 
it intends the term ``regulatory approval data'' to include data from 
post-market clinical investigations (conducted under applicable FDA 
regulations, including

[[Page 1682]]

21 CFR parts 50 and 56), clinical care data, and post-marketing 
surveillance, including data on adverse events. For example, where 
continued approval to market a drug in a country of concern is 
contingent on submission of data from ongoing product vigilance or 
other post-market requirements, the exemption applies.
    The exemption also applies even where FDA authorization for a 
product has not been sought or obtained. The Department does not, in 
these regulations, intend to require U.S. companies to first seek 
authorization to market a product in the United States before seeking 
regulatory approval or authorization from a country of concern. One 
commenter requested that this be codified in the regulatory text; the 
Department sees no need to do so because nothing in the regulatory text 
requires otherwise.
    The exemption is limited to transactions that are necessary to 
obtain or maintain regulatory approval or authorization to market or 
research a drug or other medical product. Commenters requested 
additional clarity about whether the exemption would apply to the use 
of a registered agent, country of concern third-party vendors, 
employees of a U.S. company in a country of concern, or U.S. 
subsidiaries incorporated in a country of concern to submit regulatory 
approval data to country of concern regulators. The Department agrees 
that there is a strong humanitarian interest in ensuring that U.S. 
persons may share regulatory approval data with country of concern 
regulators or covered persons as necessary to obtain or maintain 
authorization to market drugs, biological products, devices, or 
combination products. The exemption in Sec.  202.510 does so. The 
Department has revised Example 3 in Sec.  202.510 to clarify that 
sharing regulatory approval data with a registered agent, country of 
concern subsidiary of a U.S. company, or an employee of a U.S. company 
who primarily resides in a country of concern that a U.S. company 
intends for the registered agent, subsidiary, or employee to submit to 
a country of concern regulator, as required by country of concern law, 
is exempt because it is ``necessary'' to obtain approval or 
authorization. In contrast, Example 4 of Sec.  202.510 illustrates that 
entering into a vendor agreement with a covered person to store and 
organize regulatory approval data for eventual submission to a country 
of concern regulator is not ``necessary'' to obtain regulatory approval 
if it is not required by country of concern law. The Department has 
added Example 5 to clarify that the exemption would also apply to de-
identified sensitive personal data collected during post-marketing 
product surveillance to assess the safety and efficacy of a drug and 
submitted to a country of concern regulator by a local country of 
concern registered agent, pursuant to country of concern law, for a 
U.S. company to maintain authorization to market the drug in the 
country of concern.
    The Department recognizes that some U.S. persons seeking to market 
drugs, biological products, devices, or combination products in a 
country of concern may engage third-party vendors to assist with the 
submission of such data to regulatory entities. The exemption in Sec.  
202.510 is calibrated to enable such arrangements where it is 
``necessary'' to obtain or maintain regulatory approval from a country 
of concern regulator and where such data is de-identified or 
pseudonymized, consistent with FDA regulations, and reasonably 
necessary for the country of concern regulator to assess the safety and 
effectiveness of such products. One commenter suggested changing the 
exemption to include transactions that are ``reasonably necessary'' to 
obtain or maintain approval, but the full comment suggests that there 
would be substantial difficulty in divining the line between 
transactions that are ``reasonably necessary'' and those that are 
simply ``convenient.'' Given the substantial national security risks 
that the prohibitions and restrictions are intended to mitigate, the 
Department believes that a facially narrower exemption is appropriate. 
Moreover, in many cases, transactions such as these may likely proceed 
as restricted transactions under subpart D. Recognizing the complexity 
of country of concern laws and business practices associated with 
submitting regulatory approval data to country of concern regulators, 
the Department declines to provide further specificity about what data 
transactions it deems ``necessary'' to obtain or maintain regulatory 
authorization to market drugs, biological products, devices, or 
combination products. The final rule provides U.S. persons the 
opportunity to seek advisory opinions about specific, concrete data 
transactions, including the use of covered person third-party vendors, 
and general or specific licenses to authorize any such data 
transactions otherwise subject to subparts C and D. See Sec. Sec.  
202.801, 202.802, and 202.901.
    Some commenters requested that the Department exempt, under either 
Sec.  202.510 or Sec.  202.511, data transactions where a U.S. company 
has licensed the intellectual property of a country of concern 
pharmaceutical company to market--including potentially conducting a 
clinical investigation for--a country of concern-developed drug in the 
United States. The commenters explained that such licensing agreements 
may require the U.S. company to submit adverse effects reports or other 
clinical care or post-marketing surveillance data to the country of 
concern pharmaceutical company. One commenter also asked that, if the 
Department did not categorically include these types of transactions 
within the scope of the rule, it clarify that the arrangement would be 
characterized as a vendor agreement that could proceed under Sec.  
202.401.
    The Department does not assess that changes to the text of the 
exemptions are necessary. The exemption at Sec.  202.510 permits U.S. 
persons to share certain bulk U.S. sensitive personal data with a 
country of concern or covered person, if doing so is ``necessary to 
obtain or maintain regulatory authorization or approval to research or 
market a drug, biological product, device, or combination product.'' 
The exemption is not limited to circumstances in which the data is 
necessary for the U.S. person to obtain or maintain regulatory 
authorization or approval to market a drug, biological product, device, 
or combination product. Accordingly, the Department intends for the 
exemption to cover arrangements in which a U.S. person shares 
``regulatory approval data'' with a covered person, like a country of 
concern pharmaceutical company, if it would be necessary for the 
covered person to maintain regulatory authorization or approval to 
market the drug, biological product, device, or combination product, 
and the data transaction otherwise complies with the requirements of 
Sec.  202.510.
    The Department has also revised the text of Sec.  202.510 to ensure 
that any such exempted data transactions apply to circumstances in 
which a person seeks approval or authorization to market or research a 
drug, biological product, device, or combination product in a third 
country that is not a country of concern. The NPRM limited the 
exemption to circumstances in which the exempted data transaction was 
necessary to ``obtain or maintain regulatory approval to research or 
market'' the covered products ``in a country of concern.'' However, the 
Department assesses that the humanitarian interest in enabling covered 
persons to market drugs, biological products, devices, and combination 
products in third countries

[[Page 1683]]

outweighs the risk of permitting U.S. persons to provide ``regulatory 
approval data'' to covered persons for the covered person to 
subsequently market a drug, biological product, device, or combination 
product either in the country of concern or in a third country.
    The Department declines, however, to categorically exempt or 
characterize all such licensing transactions described by commenters 
without more information about the volume of such arrangements, the 
quantity and types of government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data U.S. companies provide to country of concern licensors, 
the extent to which such transactions would involve confidentiality 
protections to mask the identity of U.S. persons, and the value to U.S. 
patients and end-users of such products. Where the transaction does not 
fall into one of the existing exemptions, U.S. persons engaged in these 
types of licensing agreements may seek authorization for such 
transactions via a general or specific license, pursuant to subpart H, 
or an advisory opinion under subpart I.
    Several commenters asked the Department to provide more specificity 
about what ``sensitive personal data'' the Department would consider 
``reasonably necessary'' for a country of concern regulator to assess 
the safety and effectiveness of a drug, biological product, device, or 
combination product to satisfy the definition of ``regulatory approval 
data.'' The Department agrees with other commenters who encouraged the 
Department not to provide a brightline rule about what sensitive 
personal data would be ``reasonably necessary'' for a country of 
concern regulator to assess a product's safety and effectiveness 
because it would be difficult to anticipate all of the circumstances in 
which different types of sensitive personal data may be ``reasonably 
necessary'' to assess product safety and effectiveness in advance. 
Section 202.510 includes some examples of sensitive personal data the 
Department assesses would be ``reasonably necessary'' for a country of 
concern regulator to assess a product's safety or effectiveness. The 
Department welcomes U.S. persons to seek an advisory opinion about 
concrete data transactions they are anticipating pursuant to subpart I, 
or seek general or specific licenses to authorize data transactions 
they assess may be subject to subparts C and D, pursuant to subpart H, 
if more specificity is required.
    One commenter expressed concern that the exemption would not apply 
to ``device[s],'' like certain medical technology products that provide 
treatment or diagnostic services, unless they relate to the treatment 
of diseases or directly affect the structure of a human body. The 
Department has incorporated the term ``device'' for the purposes of 
Sec. Sec.  202.510 and 202.511, as that term is defined in 21 U.S.C. 
321(h). That provision defines a ``device'' as, among other things, 
``an instrument, apparatus, implement, machine, contrivance, implant, 
in vitro reagent, or other similar or related article, including any 
component, part, or accessory, which is--. . . (B) intended for use in 
the diagnosis of disease or other conditions, or in the cure, 
mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease, in man or other 
animals, or (C) intended to affect the structure or any function of the 
body of man or other animals.'' The Department believes that the 
commenter may have misread the definition of ``device'' in 21 U.S.C. 
321(h) as requiring that a ``device'' satisfy both subparts (B) and (C) 
of the definition, including each of the elements of subpart (B). The 
Department believes that the definition of ``device'' incorporated in 
Sec. Sec.  202.510 and 202.511 likely would apply to many ``medical 
technology product[s]'' that are ``intended for use in the diagnosis of 
disease or other conditions.''
    The same commenter encouraged the Department to add ``electronic 
products'' to the list of clinical investigations regulated by the FDA 
or supporting applications to the FDA for research or marketing permits 
for drugs, biological products, devices, combination products, or 
infant formula exempted from subparts C and D by Sec.  202.511(a)(1). 
The commenter explained that its association members produce electronic 
products, like ultrasound imaging devices and blood warmers used for 
patient care, and that permitting these members to efficiently comply 
with international regulatory processes is essential to the members' 
competitiveness. As explained in part IV.D.7 of this preamble, Sec.  
202.511 incorporates the definition of ``device'' from 21 U.S.C. 
321(h), which includes any ``instrument, apparatus, implement, machine, 
contrivance, implant, in vitro reagent, or other similar or related 
article . . . intended for use in the diagnosis of disease or other 
conditions, or in the cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of 
disease, in man or other animals.'' Accordingly, the Department 
believes that the exemption in Sec.  202.511(a)(2) may already apply to 
the ``electronic products,'' like ultrasound imaging devices and blood 
warmers, that the commenter explained were used in patient care for the 
``diagnosis of disease or other conditions, or in the cure, mitigation, 
treatment, or prevention of disease.'' The Department welcomes U.S. 
persons that produce ``electronic products'' outside the scope of the 
device definition incorporated by Sec.  202.511 to provide more 
specific details about the data transactions related to their 
electronic products that the Department should consider exempting 
through a license to authorize such data transactions with a country of 
concern or covered person, pursuant to subpart H.
    Some commenters requested that the Department add food products, 
including dietary supplements and ``health foods,'' and cosmetics to 
the lists of products in the exemptions in Sec. Sec.  202.510 and 
202.511. The commenters explained that, under some circumstances, 
countries of concern may require foreign producers of these products to 
submit data to country of concern regulators to obtain or maintain 
regulatory approval to market or research such products. The Department 
declines to adopt the commenters' recommendations. The exemptions in 
Sec. Sec.  202.510 and 202.511 are tailored to balance the humanitarian 
interest in providing access to drugs, biological products, devices, 
and combination products to individuals in countries of concern and 
globally, and ensuring that manufacturers engaged in clinical trials 
and investigations of drugs, biological products, devices, combination 
products, or infant formula can collaborate internationally with the 
pressing national security risks described in the Order, NPRM, and this 
preamble about country of concern access to government-related data and 
bulk U.S. sensitive personal data.\165\ The Department does not assess 
that the same humanitarian interests support exempting data 
transactions involving government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data relating to the production and marketing of dietary 
supplements or cosmetics in countries of concern from the prohibitions 
and restrictions in the rule, which are designed to mitigate the 
national security risk of country of concern access to such data. 
Further, commenters did not provide the Department with detailed enough 
information to assess whether the rule would impose meaningful 
restrictions on U.S. persons' ability to obtain or maintain regulatory 
approval to market or research dietary supplements or cosmetics in 
countries of concern. Regulated entities and persons may provide the 
Department more information about the specific data

[[Page 1684]]

transactions that they assess the rule may affect and seek a license 
pursuant to subpart H.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \165\ 89 FR 86118-19.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter recommended that the Department revise the definition 
of ``regulatory approval data'' to include submissions required by 
country of concern regulatory entities of bulk U.S. sensitive personal 
data--such as human genomic data or human biospecimens from which such 
human genomic data could be derived--to other covered persons--like a 
laboratory, institutional review board, or ethics committee in a 
country of concern--to obtain or maintain authorization to market a 
drug, biological product, device, or combination product. The 
Department agrees that data transactions that otherwise satisfy the 
definition of ``regulatory approval data'' and that are necessary to 
obtain or maintain authorization to market a drug, biological product, 
device, or combination product and that a country of concern regulatory 
entity requires a U.S. person to submit to another covered person for 
such purposes are exempt from subparts C and D. The Department has 
revised the exemption in Sec.  202.510 accordingly.
    Several commenters requested clarification about whether the term 
``regulatory entity'' in Sec.  202.510 includes local, municipal, 
provincial, and national regulators.
    The exemption requires that parties engaged in transactions 
involving regulatory approval data with countries of concern 
nonetheless comply with the recordkeeping and reporting requirements 
otherwise applicable to U.S. persons engaged in restricted 
transactions, because of the heightened national security risk that 
arises from transmitting government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data directly to a government entity in a country of concern. 
Some commenters asserted that this would be unduly burdensome, but they 
did not provide any further information on the scope of that burden or 
the costs of compliance. One commenter asserted that the requirement 
was duplicative of some existing requirements or practices, suggesting 
that compliance will not be excessively costly even if it does require 
some changes to current practices. This commenter also sought further 
specificity on what records would be required to be kept under this 
section. Because of the variety of transactions that might occur, the 
Department does not believe it is feasible or appropriate to specify 
the precise records that must be maintained; the regulatory text 
requires a full and accurate record, which in many cases will likely 
include, at a minimum, the information set out in subparagraphs 4, 5, 
6, 7, and 10 of Sec.  202.1101(b).
    Another commenter requested that recordkeeping and retention 
requirements not apply to U.S. companies engaging with third parties or 
vendors that assist in clinical and other research, unless those 
vendors ``have access to sensitive personal data that is not required 
for regulatory submission and is not de-identified,'' given that many 
countries of concern require by law that nationals of those countries 
provide certain data to regulatory authorities. This commenter added 
that because the Department is using the definition of ``personal 
health data'' from HIPAA, the de-identified ``regulatory approval 
data'' and ``clinical investigations and post-marketing surveillance 
data'' exempted at Sec. Sec.  202.510 and 202.511 may be ``key-coded,'' 
as provided for at 45 CFR 164.514(c), as long as the key is not held by 
or accessible to a covered person, which will preserve essential 
product safety and post-marketing surveillance activities.
    The Department declines to adopt the commenter's suggestions to 
eliminate the reporting requirements generally or for third-party 
vendors submitting regulatory approval data to a country of concern 
regulator specifically. The reporting and recordkeeping requirements 
required to comply with the exemptions at Sec. Sec.  202.510 and 
202.511 are essential for the Department to better understand the risk, 
if any, posed by sharing government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data with countries of concern or covered persons to obtain or 
maintain regulatory authorization to research or market products, or in 
the course of clinical investigations, product safety, or post-
marketing product surveillance activities. Where country of concern law 
requires a U.S. company to engage a country of concern registered agent 
or vendor to submit such data, it is essential for the Department to 
have access to records and reporting involving the transactions between 
the registered agent or vendor and the country of concern regulators to 
weigh the risks, if any, posed by such transactions. Further, while 
entities invoking the exemptions under Sec. Sec.  202.510 and 202.511 
may maintain some records related to data collected about participants 
in their clinical trials, investigations, and post-marketing product 
surveillance activities to address potential patient privacy and 
informed consent concerns, the Department's recordkeeping and reporting 
obligations are driven by the Department's interest in better 
understanding the risk posed by sharing government-related data or bulk 
U.S. sensitive personal data with specific countries of concern or 
covered persons. The extant recordkeeping and reporting obligations 
imposed by other regulatory regimes do not address this national 
security risk-focused recordkeeping and reporting obligation.
8. Section 202.511--Other Clinical Investigations and Post-Marketing 
Surveillance Data
    In response to comments received at the ANPRM stage, the Department 
proposed an exemption related to clinical investigations and post-
marketing surveillance data. Commenters were generally supportive of 
this exemption, although several commenters suggested that the 
exemption should be broadened in various ways. At a high level, these 
commenters expressed concern that, as proposed, the exemption might 
unduly harm biopharmaceutical innovation. One commenter, for example, 
emphasized that the rule, even with the exemption in Sec.  202.511, 
might limit the pharmaceutical and medical device industry's access to 
organizations and individuals with valuable expertise and capabilities. 
The Department recognizes that a consequence of the rule--indeed, its 
purpose--will be to limit certain transactions with covered persons and 
countries of concern. But neither this commenter nor other commenters 
presented evidence that covered persons, as a class, possess unique 
capabilities that cannot be obtained from other sources. In such cases, 
a regulated person or entity could seek a specific license under Sec.  
202.802.
    The Department has considered these comments and, as explained, has 
made some changes to or otherwise clarified the exemption. The 
Department believes that with these changes and clarifications, the 
exemption appropriately balances the need to mitigate the national 
security risk attendant to access to government-related data and bulk 
U.S. sensitive personal data against other interests, including 
humanitarian, economic, and scientific interests.
    The Department believes that, as discussed in the NPRM,\166\ 
existing FDA regulations governing clinical investigations and subject 
data offer sufficiently robust protection to at least mitigate national 
security concerns, and in light of the countervailing interests in 
allowing these types of transactions to proceed, the Department retains 
this

[[Page 1685]]

exemption, with some changes, in the final rule. Some commenters 
contended that the exemption should not be limited to FDA-regulated 
activities. For example, one commenter thought that the exemption 
should include ``local-for-local'' studies--that is, clinical trials 
conducted in a country of concern to support an application for 
approval by that country's regulators--even when the study is not 
regulated by the FDA. The Department believes that FDA regulations, 
though focused on a different problem, are essential to mitigate the 
national security risk identified in the Order, and declines to extend 
the exemption to non-FDA-regulated activities. The Department 
reiterates, however, that the rule does not restrict the transfer of 
non-U.S. person data to the United States and that many transactions 
can proceed as restricted transactions or subject to a license.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \166\ See 89 FR 86138-40.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The Department proposed exempting transactions ``ordinarily 
incident to and part of'' either certain clinical investigations or 
certain post-market activities. The Department adheres in the final 
rule to that scope. One commenter suggested substantially broadening 
the exemption to reach transactions that are ``incidental to and in 
furtherance of'' such activities, to allow greater industry use of 
covered persons' expertise and capabilities. As explained, the 
Department recognizes that some transactions that might otherwise occur 
in the absence of the rule might not proceed, or might proceed only 
subject to the requirements for restricted transactions, without a 
broader exemption. But the Department has not seen evidence that 
covered persons possess irreplaceable expertise or capabilities, and it 
does not believe that the proposed change properly accounts for the 
national security concerns that arise from these types of transactions.
    Other commenters sought clarification about whether the exemption 
would apply to entities involved in clinical research other than those 
actually performing the research, such as medical record companies or 
research ethics committees. The exemption is not limited to any 
particular type of entity, but rather is limited to those transactions 
that are ordinarily incident to and part of the specified activities. 
Entities seeking clarity about whether a particular transaction would 
fall within that exemption can avail themselves of the advisory opinion 
process set out in subpart I.
    Some commenters recommended that the clinical investigations 
exemption apply to all transactions involved in clinical studies or 
investigations. The commenters did not provide adequate information 
about the types of transactions, the extent to which they would qualify 
as covered data transactions that involve access by a country of 
concern or covered person to government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data, or the necessity of such transactions for the 
Department to assess the risks and benefits of expanding the exemption. 
Notably, the Department revised the definition of ``covered data 
transaction'' in Sec.  202.210 to clarify that the prohibitions and 
restrictions of the rule only apply to covered data transactions with a 
country of concern or covered person that involve access by a country 
of concern or covered person to government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data. The rule does not regulate transactions that 
do not implicate country of concern or covered person access to 
government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. And the 
exemption for clinical investigations and certain clinical care and 
post-marketing surveillance data transactions already exempts any data 
transactions within the scope of the restrictions or prohibitions of 
subparts C and D, if they are ``ordinarily incident to and part of'' 
the relevant clinical investigations or collection and processing of 
clinical care or post-marketing surveillance data. The Department 
declines to specify in advance the types of data transactions that fall 
within the scope of the exemption and welcomes regulated persons or 
entities to seek an advisory opinion or apply for a license authorizing 
any such transactions that they assess fall within the scope of the 
rule's prohibitions and restrictions.
    The Department does not intend to categorically preclude clinical 
investigations from being conducted in a country of concern and does 
not believe that the rule, even without the clinical investigation-
focused exemption, does so. The rule generally does not prohibit or 
restrict data transactions from a country of concern to the United 
States and does not apply to data unrelated to U.S. persons. The 
Department sought comments on whether, why, and to what extent it would 
be necessary for U.S. persons to transmit bulk U.S. sensitive personal 
data to a covered person in order to support a clinical investigation 
taking place in a country of concern. One commenter asserted that 
anonymized clinical data should be categorically exempted to avoid 
preventing companies from launching clinical trials in a country of 
concern, but they did not elaborate on how the rule, especially in 
light of the exemption for clinical investigations, would do so. The 
Department therefore rejects this suggestion.
    Some commenters requested clarity about what standard for de-
identification the Department intended to require for U.S. persons to 
avail themselves of the exemption. Consistent with many commenters' 
recommendations, the Department has adopted standards for de-
identification or pseudonymization that are consistent with the FDA's 
practices for adverse event reporting in 21 CFR 314.80(i) for sensitive 
personal data implicated by Sec. Sec.  202.510 and 202.511 and 
discussed in more detail in part IV.D.8 of this preamble.
    The Department is also aware that, as appropriate and required, 
certain data related to post-marketing surveillance is made available 
to global public health authorities, such as the World Health 
Organization's Vigibase. Submissions by the United States Government 
itself, such as FDA submissions to Vigibase, would be exempt under 
Sec.  202.504. Several commenters sought an explicit exemption for data 
repositories used to support medical and other public health research. 
These commenters expressed concern that, because covered persons or 
countries of concern might have access to bulk U.S. personal health or 
human genomic data submitted by a U.S. person, U.S. persons would not 
be permitted to submit data to these repositories. The Department 
declines to make any change. The rule's prohibitions and restrictions 
principally apply to covered data transactions between U.S. persons and 
covered persons or countries of concern. The rule's prohibitions and 
restrictions in subparts C and D typically would not apply, unless the 
data repositories to which U.S. researchers are submitting data are 
themselves covered persons. Further, such submissions of data may be 
exempt under Sec.  202.507 or because the submission does not involve 
an exchange of money or other consideration to satisfy the definition 
of a covered data transaction. In cases where a regulated person or 
entity believes the operative provisions of this part otherwise apply, 
such as the provision requiring contractual limits on onward data 
transfers to countries of concern or covered persons in Sec.  202.302, 
the Department encourages those parties to seek a license under subpart 
H. The available comments do not provide sufficient information for the 
Department to identify or describe the entities with whom transactions 
of this type should be exempted. But,

[[Page 1686]]

based on the public comments and subject to receipt of additional and 
more specific information, the Department believes it may be 
appropriate to issue general licenses that broadly authorize the 
submission of health- and medical research-related data to specific 
entities.
    The Department sought comment on whether the FDA recordkeeping 
provisions in 21 CFR 312.62 would be adequate such that it would be 
unnecessary to also require compliance with the recordkeeping and 
reporting requirements set forth in Sec. Sec.  202.1101(a) and 
202.1102. After reviewing the comments on this subject, the Department 
makes no change in the final rule and does not seek to impose those 
requirements on entities availing themselves of this exemption.
    The Department sought comment on whether any exemption, or parts of 
it, could feasibly be time-limited to allow industry to shift existing 
processes and operations out of countries of concern over a transition 
period. Some commenters expressed concern that the lack of clarity 
about the duration of the exemptions in Sec. Sec.  202.510 and 202.511 
would hinder U.S. companies' ability to research and market drugs, 
biological products, devices, and combination products. The Department 
agrees and has not imposed any expiration for the exemptions in the 
rule. As with any other provision of the rule, the Department may amend 
the rule in the future to address the national security risks posed by 
country of concern access to government-related data and bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data.
    The Department recognizes that some of the rule's prohibitions and 
restrictions may nonetheless affect some covered data transactions 
relating to clinical investigations and involving access by covered 
persons or countries of concern to government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data. The Department has established licensing 
provisions in subpart H to permit regulated persons or entities to seek 
the Department's authorization to continue otherwise regulated 
transactions. While some commenters valued the flexibility that 
licensing provides, they generally preferred the regulatory certainty 
of a regulatory exemption that could be supplemented by licenses for 
transactions outside the exemption. The Department agrees that this 
approach provides better clarity for regulated entities and will 
minimize, though not eliminate, disruption to medical research. The 
Department believes that both general and specific licenses will 
nonetheless play an important role in further mitigating disruption of 
medical research. One commenter, for example, suggested establishing a 
``pathway'' for approving collaboration for specific research projects. 
The Department believes the existing licensing framework establishes 
just that pathway.
9. Exemptions for Non-Federally Funded Research
    Several commenters expressed concerns that the rule would impede 
U.S. persons from participating in or sharing government-related data 
or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data pursuant to international research 
projects that involve countries of concern or covered persons, but that 
are not conducted pursuant to a contract, grant, or other agreement 
with the Federal Government or are not otherwise exempted by Sec. Sec.  
202.510 and 202.511. Commenters requested an exemption for such non-
federally funded research. The Department declines to include an 
express exemption for non-federally funded research programs in the 
rule.
    First, the definition of ``covered data transactions'' subject to 
the prohibitions and restrictions of subparts C and D identifies 
specific categories of data transactions to which the restrictions and 
prohibitions apply, each of which requires a commercial nexus. See, 
e.g., Sec.  202.214 (defining ``data brokerage'' as ``the sale of data, 
licensing of access to data, or similar commercial transactions 
involving the transfer of data''), Sec.  202.217 (defining ``employment 
agreement'' as ``any agreement or arrangement in which an individual . 
. . performs work or job functions directly for a person in exchange 
for payment or other consideration''), Sec.  202.228 (defining 
``investment agreement'' as ``an agreement or arrangement in which any 
person, in exchange for payment or other consideration, obtains direct 
or indirect ownership interests or rights in relation to'' property or 
entities), Sec.  202.258 (defining ``vendor agreement'' as ``any 
agreement or arrangement . . . in which any person provides goods or 
services to another person . . . in exchange for payment or other 
consideration''). Commenters did not provide adequate information for 
the Department to assess whether the non-federally funded research 
about which they raised concerns would satisfy the nexus to a 
commercial transaction required by the specified categories of covered 
data transactions. To the extent that U.S. persons' non-federally 
funded research would involve access to government-related data or bulk 
U.S. sensitive personal data by a country of concern or covered person 
and one of the specified categories of covered data transactions 
involving a payment or other consideration, the Department would 
welcome such regulated persons or entities to provide additional 
information necessary for the Department to assess the risks and 
benefits of the proposed transactions and apply for a specific license 
to authorize any such data transactions.
    Second, the rule does not impose any restrictions on U.S. persons 
accessing government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. 
To the extent that commenters are concerned that the rule would 
directly impede their participation in non-federally funded research 
involving their access to government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data, the rule is limited to restricting or 
prohibiting certain covered data transactions involving access by 
countries of concern or covered persons to government-related data or 
bulk U.S. sensitive personal data.
    Third, the rule does not regulate any publicly accessible material, 
including data that would otherwise constitute government-related data 
or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data in open-access data repositories. 
Commenters expressed concern that the rule would impede their ability 
to engage in research involving open-access data repositories. The 
definition of ``sensitive personal data'' excludes any data that is, at 
the time of the transaction, lawfully available to the public from a 
Federal, State, or local government record or in widely distributed 
media, including unrestricted and open-access data repositories. 
Similarly, the exemption for data transactions conducted pursuant to a 
contract, grant, or other agreement with a Federal agency or department 
would exempt from the prohibitions and restrictions of subparts C and D 
the sharing of data with an open-access data repository authorized by 
contract, grant, or other agreement with the Federal agency or 
department.
    Fourth, the Department exempted certain clinical investigations 
regulated by the FDA in Sec.  202.511(a)(1) because the Department 
agrees that the protections involving clinical investigation 
participants' data and the humanitarian interests in promoting the 
development of new drugs, biological products, devices, and combination 
products to diagnose, treat, and prevent disease and other medical 
conditions, and infant formula outweigh the national security risks of 
countries of concern obtaining access to government-related data or 
bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. Similarly, the Department exempted 
research conducted pursuant to a grant, contract, or other agreement

[[Page 1687]]

with the Federal government in Sec.  202.504 because Federal agencies 
may impose contract, grant, or agreement-based restrictions and 
reporting requirements on U.S. persons to protect government-related 
data and bulk U.S. sensitive personal data from exploitation by 
countries of concern.\167\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \167\ See, e.g., 89 FR 15426.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Non-federally funded research activities and research activities 
outside the scope of clinical investigations regulated by the FDA do 
not provide the same federally imposed protections and reporting 
requirements on government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal 
data necessary to mitigate and better assess the risks of country of 
concern access to government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data involved in such research activities.
    Fifth, at least one commenter explained that there may be 
circumstances in which clinical trials or emergency care situations 
supported by private foundations or non-governmental organizations 
involve the transfer of biological products that the commenter assessed 
could violate the prohibition on transfers of bulk human 'omic data and 
biospecimens from which such data could be derived. The exemption in 
Sec.  202.511 exempts certain data transactions involving clinical 
investigations regulated by the FDA or required for applications to the 
FDA for research or marketing permits for drugs, biological products, 
devices, combination products, and infant formula, and data 
transactions ordinarily incident to and part of the collection and 
processing of clinical care data or post-marketing surveillance data 
necessary to support or maintain authorization by the FDA, regardless 
of whether the entity engaged in the clinical investigation receives 
Federal funding. And the Department has revised the definition of 
``human biospecimens'' in Sec.  202.223 to exclude human biospecimens 
intended by a recipient solely for use in diagnosing, treating, or 
preventing any disease or medical condition.
    In light of these considerations, the Department declines to 
provide a general exemption for non-federally funded research at this 
time. To the extent that U.S. persons are concerned that they are 
involved in covered data transactions involving access by countries of 
concern or covered persons to government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data in the course of their non-federally funded 
research activities, they may seek a general or specific license 
authorizing those data transactions, pursuant to subpart H.

E. Subpart F--Determination of Countries of Concern

1. Section 202.601--Determination of Countries of Concern
    In the proposed rule, the Attorney General determined, with the 
concurrence of the Secretaries of State and Commerce, that the 
governments of six countries--the People's Republic of China (``China'' 
or ``PRC''), along with the Special Administrative Region of Hong Kong 
and the Special Administrative Region of Macau; the Russian Federation 
(``Russia''); the Islamic Republic of Iran (``Iran''); the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea (``North Korea''); the Republic of Cuba 
(``Cuba''); and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (``Venezuela'')--
have engaged in a long-term pattern or serious instances of conduct 
significantly adverse to the national security of the United States or 
the security and safety of U.S. persons, and pose a significant risk of 
exploiting government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data 
to the detriment of the national security of the United States or the 
security and safety of U.S. persons.
    One commenter expressed support for the designated countries of 
concern and for the fact that the Department made country of concern 
determinations based on the countries' specific actions. According to 
the commenter, this approach would allow the Department to remove or 
add countries to and from the list of countries of concern depending on 
their conduct. The Department agrees and notes that, with the 
concurrences of the Secretaries of State and Commerce, it has the 
authority to amend the list of countries of concern. In doing so, the 
Department would undertake a rulemaking that is subject to the ordinary 
process of robust interagency review and notice and public comment.
    One commenter asserted that the proposed rule's restrictions on 
data transactions to China and other countries are discriminatory and 
violate international law, the United Nations Charter, and World Trade 
Organization economic and trade rules. The commenter expressed firm 
opposition to the rule, demanded that the Federal Government stop what 
it characterized as discriminatory treatment of China, and reserved its 
right to pursue countermeasures.
    The rule's restrictions are not discriminatory; they are based on 
countries engaging in a long-term pattern or serious instances of 
conduct significantly adverse to the national security of the United 
States or the security and safety of U.S. persons, and posing a 
significant risk of exploiting government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data to the detriment of the national security of 
the United States or the security and safety of U.S. persons. The 
countries of concern have engaged in years of adverse and continuing 
conduct that the Department set forth in detail in the NPRM \168\ and 
in parts III, IV.B, IV.C and IV.E of this preamble.\169\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \168\ 89 FR 86141-44.
    \169\ 89 FR 86140-48.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Even just between issuance of the NPRM and the final rule, new 
incidents have come to light that demonstrate how China continues to 
aggressively threaten U.S. national security. For example, according to 
a recent press release issued jointly by the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation and CISA, ``PRC-affiliated actors have compromised 
networks at multiple telecommunications companies to enable the theft 
of customer call records data,'' and ``the compromise of private 
communications of a limited number of individuals who are primarily 
involved in government or political activity.'' \170\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \170\ Press Release, CISA, Joint Statement From FBI and CISA on 
the People's Republic of China (PRC) Targeting of Commercial 
Telecommunications Infrastructure (Nov. 13, 2024) https://www.cisa.gov/news-events/news/joint-statement-fbi-and-cisa-peoples-republic-china-prc-targeting-commercial-telecommunications [https://perma.cc/DX86-WM6Y].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    There have also been numerous recent examples of U.S. persons 
acting as unregistered agents of China. For example, in August 2024, a 
U.S. person pled guilty after obtaining a wide variety of information 
at the request of Chinese intelligence, including information about 
Chinese dissidents and pro-democracy advocates, members of the Falun 
Gong religious movement, and his employer, a major U.S. 
telecommunications company.\171\ In September 2024, a Federal grand 
jury returned an indictment charging a former New York State government 
employee for acting as an undisclosed agent of the Chinese Government 
and the CCP. In exchange for substantial economic and other benefits, 
this individual wielded influence among State executives and engaged in 
political activities that served the interests of the PRC and Chinese 
Communist Party, such as changing high-level New York State officers' 
messaging regarding issues of importance to the PRC and Chinese 
Communist Party and blocking representatives of the Taiwanese

[[Page 1688]]

government from having access to high-level New York State 
officers.\172\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \171\ See, e.g., Plea Agreement, United States v. Ping Li, supra 
note 113.
    \172\ Press Release, U.S. Dep't of Just., Former High-Ranking 
New York State Government Employee Charged with Acting as an 
Undisclosed Agent of the People's Republic of China and the Chinese 
Communist Party (Sept. 3, 2024), https://www.justice.gov/usao-edny/pr/former-high-ranking-new-york-state-government-employee-charged-acting-undisclosed [https://perma.cc/M2A8-FDGC].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Moreover, the commenter does not cite any specific provisions of 
international agreements that it alleges the rule would violate, making 
it difficult for the Department to fulsomely respond to the comment. 
Nevertheless, as the Department discussed in further detail in the NPRM 
and part IV.D.5 of this preamble, the rule's prohibitions and 
restrictions on access to government-related data and bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data by countries of concern are consistent with or 
otherwise permissible under trade and other international agreements, 
including for example, pursuant to the security exception to the World 
Trade Organization's General Agreement on Trade in Services.\173\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \173\ 89 FR 86120.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Finally, because it is outside the scope of the rule, the 
Department does not respond to the commenter's threat to take 
retaliatory measures in response to the rule.

F. Subpart G--Covered Persons

1. Section 202.211--Covered Person
    The proposed rule identified a ``covered person'' as an individual 
or entity that falls into one of four classes of covered persons, or 
that the Attorney General has designated as a covered person. The NPRM 
noted that an entity is automatically a covered person if it is a 
foreign person that: (1) is 50 percent or more owned, directly or 
indirectly, by a country of concern; (2) is organized or chartered 
under the laws of a country of concern; or (3) has its principal place 
of business in a country of concern. As the NPRM also explained, an 
entity is also a covered person if it is a foreign person that is 50 
percent or more owned, directly or indirectly, by a covered 
person.\174\ The NPRM noted that any foreign person that is an 
individual is also a covered person if that individual is an employee 
or a contractor of a country of concern or of a covered person that is 
an entity; \175\ or if that individual is primarily a resident in the 
territorial jurisdiction of a country of concern is also a covered 
person.\176\ Lastly, the NRPM listed criteria governing the 
Department's designation of covered persons.\177\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \174\ 89 FR 86148.
    \175\ Id.
    \176\ Id.
    \177\ 89 FR 86150-51.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The Department has slightly amended the language of Sec. Sec.  
202.211(a)(1) and (2) to now apply to (1) a foreign person that is an 
entity that is 50 percent or more owned, directly or indirectly, 
individually or in the aggregate, by one or more countries of concern 
or persons described in Sec.  202.211(a)(2); or that is organized or 
chartered under the laws of, or has its principal place of business in, 
a country of concern; and (2) a foreign person that is an entity that 
is 50 percent or more owned, directly or indirectly, individually or in 
the aggregate, by one or more persons described in Sec. Sec.  
202.211(a)(1), (3), (4), or (5).
    These technical corrections, which do not alter the intended scope 
of the criteria for covered persons, were necessary for three reasons. 
First, the Department streamlined the language in Sec.  202.211(a)(2) 
that references subsections of the covered person criteria for the sake 
of clarity and concision. Second, the Department changed the 50-percent 
rule language in Sec. Sec.  202.211(a)(1) and (2) to more closely match 
OFAC's 50-percent rule language, because the Department intends for the 
rules to generally be applied in a similar manner. This corrected 
language will capture, as was originally intended, indirect ownership 
as it relates to certain complex ownership structures--such as where 
two covered persons each own minority stakes in a subsidiary, but their 
aggregate ownership meets or exceeds the 50-percent threshold--
consistent with OFAC's implementation of the 50-percent rule.
    Third, the Department added ``or persons described in Sec.  
202.211(a)(2) of this section'' to ensure that foreign persons that are 
entities and 50 percent or more owned by a covered person are in scope. 
Again, this technical correction is not an expansion of the intended 
scope of this category of covered persons. Instead, this correction 
aligns the category with the description in the NPRM, which says, ``An 
entity is also a covered person if it is a foreign person that is 50 
percent or more owned, directly or indirectly, by a covered person.'' 
\178\ This therefore does not present a substantive change in the scope 
as proposed in the NPRM.\179\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \178\ 89 FR 86148.
    \179\ 89 FR 86148-50.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter suggested that the Department refine the covered 
person definition to avoid under inclusion and overinclusion. The 
commenter noted that an entity that is 50 percent owned by a country of 
concern presents the same risk as an entity with 49 percent ownership, 
even though the latter would not automatically be considered a covered 
person. The commenter is correct that an entity that is controlled, but 
not 50 percent or more owned, by one or more covered persons or 
countries of concern is not categorically considered a covered person 
under Sec.  202.211(a). At this time, however, the Department does not 
believe that a significant minority interest necessarily presents the 
same level of risk as a majority interest such that the 50-percent rule 
should be lowered, and other considerations--including the need for an 
objective, brightline rule and industry's experience in complying with 
the 50-percent rule in other national security contexts--justify 
adherence to the 50-percent rule.
    The Department agrees, however, that a controlling interest may 
present risks of access, which is why control is one of the criteria 
for the Department to designate an entity as a covered person under 
Sec.  202.211(a)(5) if such an entity is determined to meet the 
relevant criteria. U.S. persons should exercise caution when 
considering engaging in covered data transactions with an entity that 
is not a covered person but in which one or more covered persons have 
significant ownership that is less than 50 percent, or which one or 
more covered persons may control by means other than a majority 
ownership interest. Ownership percentages can fluctuate such that an 
entity could become a covered person, and such entities may be 
designated by the Department based on the significant controlling 
interest. Additionally, persons should be cautious in dealing with such 
an entity to ensure that they are not engaging in evasion or avoidance 
of the regulations.
    One commenter recommended that the Department consider applying the 
knowledge-based standard currently employed by BIS export control 
rules, which prohibits U.S. persons from proceeding with a transaction 
if they have actual knowledge that a violation of the Export 
Administration Regulations has occurred or is about to occur. As 
justification, the commenter explained that companies that meet the 
covered person criteria based on their 50 percent ownership may not be 
publicly traded, or they may be small businesses and startups invested 
in by larger entities whose own ownerships may shift with market 
conditions. The comment provides no analysis for whether the BIS 
knowledge standard would adequately address the national security 
concern as compared to the

[[Page 1689]]

``knowingly'' standard that the rule already adopts.
    Relatedly, another commenter suggested modifying the rule to allow 
U.S. persons to rely on certifications and supporting documentation 
provided by persons to establish their status as non-covered persons. 
This commenter asserted that research institutions are not 
sophisticated or capable enough to run compliance programs.
    The Department declines to make any changes to the rule in response 
to the above comments. The regulations do not prescribe or endorse any 
specific method to screen counterparties to determine their status as 
covered persons. Consistent with the NPRM, U.S. persons should employ 
compliance programs that are based on their ``individualized risk 
profile . . . [which may] vary depending on a variety of factors, 
including the U.S. person's size and sophistication, products and 
services, customers and counterparties, and geographic locations.'' 
\180\ Additionally, the rule's prohibitions and restrictions are 
subject to a knowingly standard, which generally mitigates the 
commenters' concerns. In many circumstances, depending on a U.S. 
person's individualized risk profile, a party's own statements or the 
records maintained by third parties may be an appropriate part of a 
compliance program to confirm the covered person status of 
counterparties.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \180\ 89 FR 86152-53.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter suggested that the Department aid business compliance 
efforts and automated due diligence by making the Covered Persons List 
``as comprehensive as possible'' by regularly updating and including 
aliases and technical identifiers. Another commenter similarly 
requested that the Department provide legal certainty and ease 
compliance by taking an approach under which transactions with listed 
entities are prohibited. The commenter noted that the Cyberspace 
Administration of China has ordered that access to databases listing 
corporate entities and corporate ownership structures be discontinued 
for non-Chinese database users. As a result, the commenter noted that 
it may prove difficult for U.S. companies--particularly small- and 
medium-sized U.S. businesses, which the commenter noted make up more 
than 90 percent of the manufacturing industry--to ascertain whether an 
entity is within the scope of Sec.  202.211(a).
    As discussed in part IV.E of the NPRM's preamble, the Covered 
Persons List will include each covered person that is designated by the 
Department.\181\ While these comments do not necessitate any change to 
the rule, the Department will endeavor to provide sufficient details 
about designated persons to aid the private sector in its compliance 
efforts associated with identifying and screening designated covered 
persons. The Department also supports automating and streamlining 
compliance and intends to pursue this suggestion as part of publicly 
maintaining the Covered Persons List, such as by offering text and PDF 
versions of the Covered Persons List for manual review, and data file 
versions of the list that could be designed to facilitate automated 
screening. Depending on a U.S. person's scale, sophistication, and risk 
profile of their business, it may be appropriate for a U.S. person to 
consider using one of the numerous commercially available screening 
software packages as part of a compliance program.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \181\ 89 FR 86150-51.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The Covered Persons List, however, will not exhaustively identify 
all covered persons. Monitoring compliance against a non-exhaustive 
list is not novel to the regulated public that engages in cross-border 
transactions. Indeed, maintaining a non-exhaustive list is consistent 
with the practice at OFAC, which maintains several non-exhaustive 
sanctions lists, including the Specially Designated National and 
Blocked Persons List (``SDN list'') and the Sectoral Sanctions 
Identifications List. U.S. persons engaging in covered data 
transactions may likely already screen cross-border transactions and 
other dealings against the OFAC SDN list. As OFAC notes in its 
Frequently Asked Question #91, ``some OFAC sanctions block categories 
of persons even if those persons do not appear in the SDN list, 
including . . . persons blocked pursuant to OFAC's `50 Percent Rule' . 
. . . The property and interests in property of such an entity are 
blocked regardless of whether the entity itself is listed on the SDN 
list.'' \182\ As indicated in the ANPRM and NPRM, the private sector 
will need to screen their transaction counterparties, vendors, 
employers, and investors to determine whether they meet the categories 
of covered persons in Sec.  202.211(a), in addition to those on the 
Covered Persons List.\183\ U.S. persons who comply with OFAC sanctions 
should be familiar with taking a risk-based approach to sanctions 
screening such that this concept will not be novel.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \182\ Off. of Foreign Asset Control, U.S. Dep't of Treas., 
Frequently Asked Questions: 91. What Lists Does OFAC Maintain? Where 
Can I Find These Lists? (Aug. 21, 2024), https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/91 [https://perma.cc/Q8XA-RJ2Z].
    \183\ 89 FR 86149-51.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    A commenter argued that it is often nearly impossible, from a 
compliance perspective, for companies to determine ownership of 
companies located in a country of concern. This comment was entirely 
conclusory, and the Department disagrees. U.S. persons (and persons 
otherwise subject to U.S. jurisdiction) already must ensure that they 
are not engaging in trade or other transactions with persons designated 
by OFAC.\184\ The commenter is silent on the specific ways in which the 
Department's rule requiring due diligence into company ownership would 
be harder to comply with than OFAC's regulations, which also expect the 
regulated community to screen for ownership. OFAC's regulations treat 
any entity owned in the aggregate, directly or indirectly, 50 percent 
or more by one or more blocked persons as itself a blocked person, 
regardless of whether the entity itself is designated pursuant to an 
Executive Order or otherwise identified on OFAC's SDN list.\185\ As 
such, the Department expects that much of the regulated public will 
have already have experience developing and implementing a tailored, 
risk-based compliance program for sanctions screening that includes 
methods for determining whether a foreign vendor, contractor, or 
counterparty is an SDN or owned by an SDN. The Department declines to 
make any change to the rule in response to this comment.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \184\ See, e.g., Off. of Foreign Asset Control, U.S. Dep't of 
Treas., Frequently Asked Questions: 65. How Frequently Is an Insurer 
Expected to Screen Its Databases for OFAC Compliance? (Nov. 13, 
2024), https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/65 [https://perma.cc/VJM5-DTXD]; Off. of Foreign Asset Control, U.S. Dep't of Treas., 
Frequently Asked Questions: 95. Does a Financial Institution Have 
the Obligation to Screen Account Beneficiaries for Compliance With 
OFAC Regulations? (Dec. 4, 2006), https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/95 
[https://perma.cc/RXN9-YXZU]; Off. of Foreign Asset Control, U.S. 
Dep't of Treas., Frequently Asked Questions: 445. What Are My 
Compliance Obligations With Respect to E.O. 13694, as Amended? (Dec. 
29, 2016), https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/445 [https://perma.cc/C5RP-GGN4]; Off. of Foreign Asset Control U.S. Dep't of Treas., 
Frequently Asked Questions: 813. As a Member of the Art Community, 
What Are My Compliance Obligations With Respect to Executive Order 
13224, as Amended? (Dec. 13, 2019), https://ofac.treasury.gov/faqs/813 [https://perma.cc/RUW8-VMK4].
    \185\ See generally Off. of Foreign Asset Control, U.S. Dep't of 
Treas., Revised Guidance on Entities Owned by Persons Whose Property 
and Interests in Property Are Blocked (Aug. 13, 2014), https://ofac.treasury.gov/media/6186/download?inline [https://perma.cc/Q87V-VZJQ].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Several commenters asserted that the categories of covered persons 
are too broad. These comments, however, are generally premised on 
various misapplications of the categories. For

[[Page 1690]]

example, one commenter noted a concern that a company's ``association 
with a country of concern'' would restrict that company from receiving 
data from U.S. companies. The commenter further noted that this concern 
is especially salient for entities on the Covered Persons List that are 
owned by a country of concern or an entity located in those countries. 
But a company does not become a covered person merely for having ``an 
association'' with a country of concern or a covered person. As listed 
in Sec.  202.211(a), the criteria for falling into a covered person 
category or for being designated as a covered person are more rigorous 
than merely having associated with a country of concern or covered 
person. The scope of the categories of covered persons is correlated to 
the risk that a person or entity could be leveraged by a country of 
concern for access to government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data. A company merely being ``associated'' with a country of 
concern or covered person, absent a reason to believe they meet Sec.  
202.211(a) criteria, does not rise to the level of risk that the rule 
intends to address and is an exaggeration of the rule's prohibitions.
    As another example, another commenter claimed that there are 40 
million ``registered'' firms in one of the countries of concern and 
asserted that all of them would be considered covered persons under the 
rule. Section 202.211(a) does not categorically treat an entity as a 
covered person just because it is ``registered'' in a country of 
concern. Instead, it covers foreign person entities that are 
``organized or chartered under the laws of'' or have their ``principal 
place of business in'' a country of concern. Registration to do 
business in a country is legally different than being organized under 
the laws of a country or having a principal place of business there. 
The latter is far narrower in scope than those merely ``registered in'' 
a country of concern, which could include, for example, companies that 
do no business in a country, or those that are not subject to the 
direction or control of its government, but register in order to 
protect their intellectual property.
    Additionally, the rule does not require U.S. persons to identify 
and catalogue every individual and entity that meets the covered person 
criteria. Instead, the rule requires U.S. persons to examine their much 
smaller demographic of current or prospective clients, vendors, 
employees, and investors to determine whether those individuals or 
entities meet the criteria of Sec.  202.211(a). This commenter has 
chosen to mis-frame the rule as if it requires a U.S. person to boil 
the ocean (identify every covered person in the world), when it merely 
requires a U.S. person to boil their own pot (know their own customers, 
vendors, employees, and investors).
    The same commenter stated that every single vendor, employment, and 
investment agreement with these ``registered'' entities would be 
subject to the Department's rule. Again, this comment misapplies the 
rule, artificially inflating its scope. The commenter neglects to 
consider any of the other elements or scoping of the rule. Other than 
the limited onward-transfer provision, the rule regulates only 
enumerated types of commercial transactions by U.S. persons with 
countries of concern or covered persons that give those countries or 
covered persons access to government-related data or to the six types 
of bulk U.S. sensitive personal data that meet or exceed the bulk 
thresholds, where none of the exemptions, general licenses, or specific 
licenses apply. This comment also neglects to consider that the rule 
does not prohibit the restricted transactions but rather allows U.S. 
persons to engage in such transactions under the condition that they 
comply with certain security and other requirements.
    Another commenter expressed concerns that some may misinterpret the 
rule as prohibiting U.S. persons from allowing foreign researchers of a 
country of concern nationality access to Americans' data. As such, the 
commenter requested clarification of whether foreign researchers 
working for companies outside of countries of concern are excluded from 
the rule's provisions even if such foreign researchers are of a country 
of concern nationality.
    Under the rule's definition of a covered person, a foreign 
individual (such as a researcher) who is a national of a country of 
concern would not be a covered person unless they (1) primarily reside 
in a country of concern; (2) are employed by or a contractor of a 
country of concern or a covered person; or (3) are designated by the 
Department as a covered person.
    As the Order and rule make clear, the definition of ``covered 
person'' follows risk, not race, nationality, or ethnicity. The Order 
and rule are directed at persons of any race, nationality, or ethnicity 
who are subject to the ownership, direction, jurisdiction, or control 
of a country of concern. The definition of ``covered person'' 
categorically includes any foreign person that is primarily resident in 
a country of concern, regardless of their nationality or race. The rule 
does not categorically treat country of concern nationals that are 
located in third countries (i.e., not located in the United States and 
not primarily resident in a country of concern) as covered persons. 
Instead, the rule treats only a subset of country of concern nationals 
in third countries categorically as covered persons: those working for 
the government of a country of concern, or for an entity that is a 
covered person. Similarly, the Department's authority to designate a 
specific individual as a covered person turns on a determination that 
the individual is subject to the control, jurisdiction, or direction of 
a country of concern, or is acting on behalf of or purporting to act on 
behalf of a country of concern or covered person, or has knowingly 
caused or directed a violation of the rule.
    The definition of ``U.S. person'' is also not dependent on a 
person's nationality or race; it includes, for example, any person in 
the United States, any U.S. citizen or lawful permanent resident, and 
any person who has been granted asylum or refugee status in the United 
States. For example, under the rule, a country of concern citizen 
located in the United States is a U.S. person (unless individually 
designated). As a result, a U.S. person of any race, nationality, or 
ethnicity would not be categorically treated as a covered person, and 
the only circumstance in which a U.S. person would be treated as a 
covered person is by individual designation. Consequently, the rule 
adopts the approach described in the NPRM without change.\186\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \186\ 89 FR 86150.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

[[Page 1691]]

    One commenter asked for clarification on when a foreign company is 
``in the United States'' with respect to the definition of ``U.S. 
person'' in Sec.  202.256. More specifically, the commenter asked 
whether a company that conducts business with U.S. individuals but does 
not have a U.S. branch or subsidiary could meet the definition. Selling 
to U.S. customers does not place a foreign person ``in the United 
States.'' A foreign company with no headquarters, subsidiary, or other 
physical presence in the United States is not ``in the United States'' 
for the purposes of Sec.  202.256.
    One commenter asserted that the proposed rule's definitions of 
covered person, person, foreign person, and U.S. person are internally 
inconsistent because the proposed rule treats Chinese or Russian 
citizens located in the United States as U.S. persons, but it treats 
U.S. branches of companies organized under the laws of a country of 
concern as foreign persons. The commenter asked that the Department 
ensure that the definitions align and treat entities and individuals 
alike, or that the Department modify the definitions to demonstrate how 
entities and individuals are treated differently.
    The proposed rule does not treat entities and individuals 
differently; rather, it treats branches of companies, which are not 
independent entities and do not have their own separate corporate 
personhood, as part of their parent companies. As a result, as 
demonstrated in the examples at Sec. Sec.  202.256(b)(7) and (8), the 
U.S. branch of a company organized under the laws of a country of 
concern is treated as a foreign person, but a U.S. subsidiary of a 
foreign company, which is a separate entity from the parent, is treated 
as a U.S. person. This treatment of foreign branches aligns with OFAC's 
treatment of foreign branches in its IEEPA-based sanctions programs. 
The Department has added related examples in Sec. Sec.  202.211(b)(7) 
and (8) to further illustrate this point.
    One commenter listed several fact patterns involving U.S. person 
entities that were owned 50 percent or more by covered persons or 
countries of concern and noted that these U.S. person entities ``would 
be covered persons'' under the rule. As described in the ANPRM, 
including its Example 33, anyone in the United States (including those 
temporarily in the United States) would be considered a U.S. person, 
and no U.S. persons (including those temporarily in the United States) 
would be categorically treated as covered persons.\187\ See also 
Example 6 in Sec.  202.211(b)(6). Furthermore, the categories of 
covered persons in Sec. Sec.  202.211(a)(1) through (4) explicitly 
apply only to foreign persons, not U.S. persons, and the category in 
Sec.  202.211(a)(5) (which applies to any person) requires individual 
designation by the Department. The rule does not treat any U.S. person, 
including a U.S. subsidiary of a covered person, as a covered person 
unless the Department has individually designated the U.S. person as a 
covered person. The rule adopts the NPRM's examples illustrating the 
differences in treatment between a U.S. subsidiary and its foreign 
owner, as well as between U.S. companies and their foreign branches. 
The rule adopts this proposal unchanged from the NPRM.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \187\ 89 FR 15790-91.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    The same commenter also provided several scenarios involving 
entities that the commenter concluded would meet covered person 
criteria in Sec. Sec.  202.211(a)(2) or (3). In these examples, the 
commenter repeated essentially the same fact pattern: A country of 
concern owns 50 percent of third-country Company A that, in turn owns 
50 percent of a second third-country Company B. In some instances, the 
commenter stated that Company B would be a covered person under the 
rule because of the country of concern's mere 25 percent indirect 
ownership.
    This reasoning misapplies the 50-percent rule. Company B is a 
covered person, but not because the country of concern indirectly owns 
25 percent of the company. Twenty-five percent ownership by a country 
of concern or covered person is less than the 50-percent rule requires. 
Instead, Company B is a covered person because it is 50 percent or more 
owned by a covered person (Company A), and Company A is a covered 
person because it is 50 percent or more owned by a country of concern. 
If, however, Company A were not a covered person (because its country 
of concern ownership was less than 50 percent and it did not meet any 
other criteria for covered persons), then Company B would not be a 
covered person, even with its less-than-50-percent indirect ownership 
by a country of concern. The Department has added an example at Sec.  
202.211(b)(8) to further clarify this point.
    The commenter recited several additional scenarios that can be 
reduced to the same fact pattern described above, each referring to 
subsidiaries located in different countries that are not countries of 
concern. The commenter's examples mention various non-country of 
concern locations where countries of concern and covered persons may 
have set up subsidiaries, and asserts that the existence of these 
subsidiaries somehow makes the rule overbroad. The commenter appears to 
be claiming that a rule that targets a country of concern or covered 
person should regulate only persons and property within that country's 
territory, and that any other result is evidence of the rule's 
overbreadth.
    The Department disagrees and is not aware of any precedent for such 
a claim. The fact pattern discussed above and the examples in the rule 
are classic demonstrations of the 50-percent rule being applied as 
intended. The commenter does not explain how the application of the 50-
percent rule, which is drafted to match the longstanding language and 
application used by OFAC for years, somehow produces an unexpected or 
overbroad result.
    In the sanctions' context, for example, if OFAC designates and 
blocks a Russian bank that operates in Russia and is owned by Russian 
government, all property and interests in property of that Russian bank 
are also blocked by operation of law. If that Russian bank operates 
subsidiaries in countries outside of Russia, even in countries that are 
partners and allies of the United States, those subsidiaries would be 
blocked persons by operation of law and U.S. persons would be 
prohibited from engaging in transactions and dealings with those 
subsidiaries, wherever located, unless exempt or otherwise authorized. 
The commenter provides no justification or argument explaining why 
consistent application of the 50-percent rule across regulatory 
programs would be inappropriate in the context of this rule.
    In addition, the cross-border nature of countries of concern and 
covered persons' corporate hierarchy further supports the need for the 
rule to regulate covered persons that are outside a country of concern. 
Specifically, the national security and foreign policy risks identified 
in the Order exist with respect to any entity that is subject to the 
ownership, direction, jurisdiction, or control of a country of concern 
due to the fact that each of the countries of concern listed in the 
rule have legal or political systems that allow those countries to 
obtain sensitive personal data (and access to such data) from persons 
subject to a country of concern's ownership, direction, jurisdiction, 
or control without due process or judicial redress.\188\ Those risks 
exist with

[[Page 1692]]

respect to any person that is meaningfully subject to their ownership, 
direction, jurisdiction, or control--not only to specific entities 
designated on a case-by-case basis. Entities that are meaningfully 
subject to the ownership, direction, jurisdiction, or control of a 
country of concern are, as the FBI has described, hybrid commercial 
threats. According to the FBI, ``[h]ybrid [c]ommercial [t]hreats are 
businesses whose legitimate commercial activity can facilitate foreign 
government access to U.S. data, critical infrastructure, and emerging 
technologies that enable adversaries to conduct espionage, technology 
transfer, data collection, and other disruptive activities under the 
disguise of an otherwise legitimate commercial activity.'' \189\ For 
example, DHS explained in 2020 that ``PRC laws are most effective at 
creating compulsory data access when the data travels through a PRC 
firm abroad or a firm located within the PRC.'' \190\ The categories of 
covered persons defined in the Order and defined further in the rule 
identify categories of persons that present such hybrid commercial 
threats because they are meaningfully subject to the ownership, 
direction, jurisdiction of a country of concern, or to the control of a 
country of concern or covered person.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \188\ Nat'l Counterintel. & Sec. Ctr., supra note 67, at 1; 
Justin Sherman, Russia Is Weaponizing Its Data Laws Against Foreign 
Organizations, Brookings Inst. (Sept. 27, 2022), https://www.brookings.edu/articles/russia-is-weaponizing-its-data-laws-against-foreign-organizations/ [https://perma.cc/ATU2-SU3G]; U.S. 
Dep't of State, 2022 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: 
Venezuela 19 (2022), https://www.state.gov/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/415610_VENEZUELA-2022-HUMAN-RIGHTS-REPORT.pdf [https://perma.cc/7TM9-P87S]. See generally Freedom in the World 2024: North Korea, 
Freedom House, https://freedomhouse.org/country/north-korea/freedom-world/2024 [https://perma.cc/5PAA-YMQ4]; Freedom on the Net 2022: 
Cuba, Freedom House, https://freedomhouse.org/country/cuba/freedom-net/2022 [https://perma.cc/FFF6-ALCB]; U.S. Dep't of Homeland Sec., 
supra note 57; Anna Borshchevskaya, `Brave New World': Russia's New 
Anti-Terrorism Legislation, Wash. Inst. (July 8, 2016), https://www.washingtoninstitute.org/policy-analysis/brave-new-world-russias-new-anti-terrorism-legislation [https://perma.cc/2XXZ-UTC7]; 
Combating the Iranian Cyber Threat: Republic at the Center of Cyber 
Crime Charges in Three Cases, Fed. Bureau of Investig. (Sept. 18, 
2020), https://www.fbi.gov/news/stories/iran-at-center-of-cyber-crime-charges-in-three-cases-091820 [https://perma.cc/DYL5-WXUC]; 
Amelia Williams, Cuba: New Data Protection Law--What you need to 
Know, Data Guidance (Sept. 2022), https://www.dataguidance.com/opinion/cuba-new-data-protection-law-what-you-need-know [https://perma.cc/JH83-6P7S]; Joanna Robin, Maduro Regime Doubles Down on 
Censorship and Repression in Lead-Up to Venezuelan Election, ICIJ 
(July 24, 2024), https://www.icij.org/inside-icij/2024/07/maduro-regime-doubles-down-on-censorship-and-repression-in-lead-up-to-venezuelan-election/ [https://perma.cc/6TBD-4J28]; U.S. Dep't of 
State, Bureau of Democracy, H.R. &Lab., 2021 Country Reports on 
Human Rights Practices: North Korea (2021), https://www.state.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/313615_KOREA-DEM-REP-2021-HUMAN-RIGHTS-REPORT.pdf [https://perma.cc/GF5Z-25UG]; Freedom on the Net 2024: 
Iran, Freedom House at C4, C6, https://freedomhouse.org/country/iran/freedom-net/2024 [https://perma.cc/2QKR-9E7C].
    \189\ In Camera, Ex Parte Classified Decl. of Kevin Vorndran, 
Assistant Dir., Counterintel. Div., Fed. Bureau of Invest., Doc. No. 
2066897 at Gov't App. 33 ] 6, TikTok Inc. v. Garland, Case Nos. 24-
1113, 24-1130, 24-1183 (D.C. Cir. July 26, 2024) (publicly filed 
redacted version).
    \190\ U.S. Dep't of Homeland Sec., supra note 57, at 10.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter requested, in the context of restricted transactions, 
that the Department limit the definition of ``covered person'' to the 
criteria listed in Sec. Sec.  202.211(a)(1), (4), and (5). According to 
the commenter, for foreign persons meeting the criteria in Sec. Sec.  
202.211(a)(2) through (3), the nexus to a country of concern is weak 
and it would be too difficult for businesses to assert controls across 
all restricted transactions. The commenter provided the following 
example: A Japanese national (or a national of a country that is not a 
country of concern) owns Company A, which is incorporated under the 
laws of China. Company A owns 50 percent or more of Company B, an 
Australian company, and Company B hires a contractor who is a Canadian 
national. The commenter asserts that scenarios where a U.S. person 
engages in a restricted covered data transaction involving a vendor 
agreement with the contractor pose only a highly attenuated national 
security risk.
    The Department disagrees. Company B's majority ownership by Company 
A--which carries with it formal control over all business decisions, a 
controlling level of informal influence, and a formal legal 
jurisdiction over Company B--is a classic example of a hybrid 
commercial threat. Any work completed by the contractor, who meets the 
covered person category in Sec.  202.211(a)(3), carries this same risk. 
The commenter's scenario highlights the pervasiveness of the threat, as 
well as the reach that countries of concern have to try to obtain 
access to Americans' data. The scenario indeed reinforces that, without 
engaging in robust due diligence, U.S. companies could unknowingly 
provide foreign adversaries with the means to access data that harms 
America's national security. As such, the rule adopts the approach 
described in the NPRM without change.
    Finally, one commenter suggested that the Department exempt from 
the prohibitions of the rule any covered persons who are ethical and 
compliant to prevent undue restrictions on legitimate research. The 
Department declines to adopt this suggestion. As explained in the NPRM, 
countries of concern have the legal authority or political systems to 
force, coerce, or influence persons under their jurisdiction to share 
their data and access with the country of concern's government, 
regardless of how ethical or trustworthy the person is.\191\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \191\ 89 FR 86148-50.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. Section 202.701--Designation of Covered Persons
    The proposed rule provided for the Attorney General to publicly 
designate a person, whether an individual or entity, as a covered 
person with whom U.S. persons may not knowingly engage in a prohibited 
transaction, or a restricted transaction that fails to comply with the 
requirements of subpart D, except as otherwise authorized under the 
rule. As set out in the NPRM, this process is modeled generally on the 
processes for designation under the various sanctions' lists maintained 
by OFAC. The Department received only limited comments on this subject, 
and it adopts the proposed regulation without change.
    One commenter suggested that the criteria for designation as a 
covered person were insufficiently determinate and that U.S. persons 
would avoid legitimate transactions for fear that their counterparties 
might be designated at some point in the future. The Department 
believes this concern is too speculative to support a change in the 
designation criteria, which themselves reflect the criteria established 
by the President in the Order. Although resource and information 
constraints or other factors will require the Department to exercise a 
degree of discretion in choosing which potentially designable persons 
should be pursued for designation, whether a person is subject to 
designation is reasonably determinate once relevant facts are known. As 
in the context of analogous sanctions regimes, U.S. companies routinely 
perform due diligence on prospective counterparties. That U.S. persons 
may lack access to the same information that the Department has in 
assessing their potential counterparties' risk for designation is 
unavoidable and does not warrant changing the criteria. Moreover, Sec.  
202.901 establishes a process for seeking an advisory opinion from the 
Department on contemplated transactions.
    The same commenter suggested that the rule exempt from designation 
U.S.-based subsidiaries that adopt the CISA security requirements and 
U.S.-based subsidiaries that have a substantial presence in the United 
States. This commenter, as well as another

[[Page 1693]]

commenter, also observed that entities--such as U.S. subsidiaries of 
covered person-owned companies--may be unable to take actions to avoid 
designation. The Department rejects these suggestions. As explained in 
the NPRM, the designation process allows the Department to address 
risks to national security that may arise from the designated person's 
relationship--whether voluntary or involuntary--with a country of 
concern.\192\ As a general matter, the national security risk from 
concluding a covered data transaction with such a person may arise from 
the potential actions of the government of the country of concern in 
relation to that person, and not necessarily from the intent or 
personal characteristics of the individual or entity. The scope of a 
subsidiary's business in the United States or its adoption of security 
measures may be relevant to the exercise of the Department's discretion 
to designate that subsidiary but will not categorically exempt the 
subsidiary from designation. Under the final rule, an entity whose 
relationship with a covered person or country of concern changes--for 
example, through divestment by the covered person owner--such that the 
entity would no longer be subject to ownership or control by a covered 
person or otherwise satisfy the designation criteria, would be able to 
seek removal from the Covered Persons List.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \192\ 89 FR 86151.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Two commenters raised identical concerns that designations would 
not be subject to independent judicial review. A designated person or 
entity can petition the Department directly for reconsideration of its 
designation, and the Department also anticipates that designated 
entities will be able to avail themselves of existing judicial 
remedies, including, as applicable, under the Administrative Procedure 
Act, 5 U.S.C. 701 et seq. These commenters also objected that 
consultation by the Department with other agencies when making 
designation decisions was not mandatory. The commenters do not explain 
how mandatory consultation in every instance would meaningfully improve 
the rule, and the Department believes that mandatory consultation would 
unduly hinder administration of the rule by slowing decision-making and 
by needlessly diverting other agencies' resources from their primary 
missions. For example, it may be unnecessary to consult with the 
Department of Health and Human Services when contemplating a 
designation of an entity that works in the financial sector. The 
Department does expect to consult the Department of State on foreign 
policy concerns and other agencies as appropriate based on their 
applicable equities and expertise. The final rule better reflects this 
intention by explicitly including the Department of State in the list 
of agencies to be consulted. These commenters also objected to the use 
of classified information in designation decisions. However, use of 
classified information is expressly contemplated by IEEPA, see 50 
U.S.C. 1702(c), and courts have routinely upheld the use of classified 
information in the IEEPA context. See, e.g., Global Relief Found., 
Inc., v. O'Neill, 315 F.3d 748, 754 (7th Cir. 2002); cf. People's 
Mojahedin Org. of Iran v. Dep't of State, 327 F.3d 1238, 1242 (D.C. 
Cir. 2003).
    Another commenter raised concerns that the designation process 
would violate due process in some circumstances. Although the 
Department believes that due process concerns are best addressed in the 
context of a specific case, it is confident that the process outlined--
which largely mirrors the process used by OFAC for designating 
sanctions targets--is consistent with the Constitution and due process 
principles. Due process is a flexible concept, and the Constitution's 
preference for pre-deprivation notice and opportunity to be heard is 
subject to many exceptions, including when, as here, a pre-deprivation 
notice and hearing would risk the very harm to public interest that the 
government seeks to limit. See, e.g., Gilbert v. Homar, 520 U.S. 924, 
930 (1997) (suspension without pay of State employee); FDIC v. Mallen, 
486 U.S. 230, 240 (1988) (suspension of banking license). As explained 
in the NPRM, designations must be immediately effective to prevent 
designated covered persons from engaging in transactions that create 
the national security risk that the designation is designed to avoid; 
the data, once transferred to the jurisdiction of a country of concern, 
likely cannot be clawed back.\193\ Pre-deprivation notice would create 
the same risk, and in these circumstances the flexibility of due 
process principles permits the government to rely on post-deprivation 
process. See Glob. Relief Found., 315 F.3d at 754; Al Haramain, 686 
F.3d at 987; Zevallos v. Obama, 10 F. Supp. 3d 111, 127 (D.D.C. 2014), 
aff'd, 793 F.3d 106 (D.C. Cir. 2015). The Department is committed to 
implementing the regulations consistent with constitutional 
requirements, and declines this commenter's suggestion to categorically 
limit designations to foreign persons.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \193\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter requested that the Department affirmatively authorize 
academic researchers engaged in international research involving 
government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data to rely on 
documentation from international researchers outside a country of 
concern certifying that the international researchers are not covered 
persons. The Department declines to adopt this brightline rule. The 
Department expects U.S. persons engaged in data transactions involving 
access by countries of concern or covered persons to government-related 
data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data to develop reasonable due 
diligence processes to ensure that they are not knowingly engaging in a 
covered data transaction with a covered person or country of concern. 
Notably, the prohibitions and restrictions in subparts C and D only 
apply to covered data transactions in which U.S. persons knowingly 
engage with countries of concern or covered persons. The reasonableness 
of those due diligence requirements will vary depending on the nature 
of the U.S. person engaging in such transactions; the counterparties 
with whom the U.S. person is engaging; and the volume, purpose, and 
nature of the bulk U.S. sensitive personal data or government-related 
data involved in the data transaction. For example, under some 
circumstances, it may be reasonable for a U.S. person to rely on 
certifications with supporting documentation from a foreign person that 
the foreign person is not a covered person. However, in light of the 
varying circumstances identified above, the Department declines to 
adopt a brightline rule about what specific due diligence mechanisms 
would apply.

G. Subpart H--Licensing

    The proposed rule provided processes for regulated parties to seek, 
and for the Department to issue, general and specific licenses. As 
described in the NPRM, general licenses would be published in the 
Federal Register and could be relied upon by all relevant parties 
affected by a particular element of the regulations.\194\ The 
Department anticipates that licenses will be issued only in rare 
circumstances as the Department deems appropriate. Specific licenses, 
on the other hand, would cover only parties who apply to the Department 
for such a license and disclose the facts and circumstances of the 
covered data transaction they seek to engage in. Specific licenses 
would

[[Page 1694]]

authorize only the transactions described in the license; a specific 
license might authorize one or more transactions that would otherwise 
be prohibited.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \194\ 89 FR 86151-52.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter noted that the proposed rule did not provide clarity 
regarding how companies can seek requests for general licenses, nor a 
timeline for the Department to respond to a request for a general 
license. The commenter recommended that general licenses mimic OFAC's 
general licenses for medicines, which list a broad range of permitted 
activities. They also suggested that the Department include a mechanism 
for emergency authorization or expedited licenses to cover multiple 
data transfers, so that companies do not have to seek a license for 
each data transfer.
    Companies seeking licenses should submit requests for specific 
licenses, not general licenses. The Department will determine and 
issue, at its discretion, general licenses in particular circumstances, 
such as where multiple companies in the same industry submit requests 
for specific licenses on the same topic, or in circumstances where the 
Department otherwise learns of a need to issue a general license, such 
as via industry engagement. The Department intends for general licenses 
to reflect some of OFAC's practices, and the Department has and will 
continue to examine those licenses to identify ways to structure the 
Department's general licenses. The Department anticipates that 
licenses--whether specific or general--will, in some cases, cover 
multiple data transactions in the same area, and that companies will 
not have to seek licenses for each data transfer. The Department also 
intends to consider emergency requests for specific licenses and, 
potentially, to issue general licenses that respond to emergencies, 
depending on the circumstances.
    One commenter asked for clarification regarding how companies 
should submit requests for specific licenses. Section 202.802 describes 
that process, and the Paperwork Reduction Act submission that 
accompanied the proposed rule identified the information that an 
applicant would need to provide to the Department as part of a specific 
license application.\195\ The Department intends to issue additional 
guidance to further describe the process for submitting specific 
license requests to help guide the regulated community.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \195\ 89 FR 86203.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter expressed concern that, given that the Department has 
stated that licensing decisions will rarely be granted and will 
presumptively be denied, relying on licensing could raise the risk and 
cost of doing business in the biopharmaceutical sector, and will have 
scientific and business consequences for U.S. biotechnology companies. 
The Department recognizes the importance of promoting scientific 
research and biopharmaceutical developments to the U.S. economy, as 
well as to global health and well-being. As described in part IV.D of 
this preamble, the rule includes important exemptions to mitigate the 
consequences and costs of the rule's prohibitions and restrictions on 
scientific and medical research, and to preserve the development of 
innovative treatments for diseases and other medical conditions. See 
also Sec. Sec.  202.504, 202.507, 202.510, and 202.511. The Department 
has also sought to clarify, in part IV.D of this preamble and in 
examples associated with the exemptions in subpart E, how the rule will 
apply to certain data transactions related to scientific research and 
the development of new medical treatments to provide regulated entities 
greater certainty about the rule's effect on their activities and to 
reduce the costs of complying with the rule. Notwithstanding these 
exemptions and clarifications, the licensing regime set forth in 
subpart H provides an important mechanism for the Department to grant 
additional categorical and case-by-case exemptions to the rule to 
ensure that the Department effectively balances the pressing national 
security risks of country of concern access to government-related data 
and bulk U.S. sensitive personal data with the Department's interest in 
promoting U.S. leadership in scientific research and pharmaceutical and 
biotechnological development. The Department intends to issue 
additional public guidance about how regulated entities may apply 
licenses before the rule's effective date to aid such entities in 
applying for licenses
    One commenter expressed concern about the Department's ability to 
oversee the large and consequential task of issuing licenses, and they 
encouraged the Department to seek additional input from industry groups 
that have expansive experience with other similar licensing processes. 
The commenter also suggested testing any licensing scheme before it 
goes live. The Department appreciates this comment and will take it 
into consideration and follow-up as useful with relevant stakeholders 
after issuance of the final rule.
    One commenter urged the Department to firmly commit to responding 
to licensing requests on a timely basis, and asked that the Department 
automatically approve any licenses it does not respond to in 45 days. 
The commenter also asked that the Department clarify whether the 45-day 
period set forth in Sec.  202.802 for the Department to endeavor to 
respond to a request for a specific license means that the Department 
may issue or deny a license 45 days from submission of a request, or 
that the Department may, for example, only issue an initial response 
seeking more information about a license by the end of the 45-day 
period.
    The Department is committed to timely responding to requests for 
licenses. The Department will endeavor to respond to license requests 
swiftly to ensure that it has received all information relevant to a 
license, and to issue licensing decisions 45 days from when the 
Department has received all information from the parties necessary to 
make a licensing decision. However, the Department declines to 
automatically approve licenses that it has not responded to within 45 
days, because, as discussed in part IV.G of this preamble, the issuance 
of licenses is an exception to the rule to allow for transactions that 
warrant licenses, not a default. Moreover, depending on the subject 
matter in the license request, the Department may need to seek input 
from other agencies with relevant expertise and must ensure that it has 
sufficient time to do so.
    One commenter asserted that the NPRM's proposal to include 
additional obligations on companies as conditions of specific licenses 
could lead to uncertainty and confusion by adding case-by-case 
requirements. Although the Department appreciates this concern, the 
Department maintains that it is important to retain the flexibility to 
impose requirements on specific licenses so that it can adequately 
respond to the fact-specific transactions presented in each specific 
license request, while also determining how to protect, to the greatest 
extent possible, the sensitive personal data involved in the underlying 
transactions.
    One commenter suggested requiring license applicants to demonstrate 
compliance with existing data security frameworks. The Department 
agrees that demonstrating adequate attention to data security is likely 
to be an important factor in licensing decisions, but it declines to 
require any particular substantive requirement with respect to specific 
licenses in order to preserve the flexibility that the license is meant 
to provide.

[[Page 1695]]

H. Subpart I--Advisory Opinions

1. Section 202.901--Inquiries Concerning Application of This Part
    The NPRM proposed a system whereby the Attorney General could 
provide guidance on the rule in the form of official guidance or 
written advisory opinions. The final rule adopts the NPRM's proposal. 
The Department may issue official guidance at any time, including to 
address recurring or novel issues. The Department may also issue 
guidance in response to specific inquiries received through advisory 
opinion procedures.
    One commenter expressed appreciation that trade associations may 
seek guidance on behalf of their members. Another commenter asked 
whether the Department would issue standardized guidelines beyond 
advisory opinions once the rule has been published. In addition to 
publishing advisory opinions, the Department intends to publish general 
forms of interpretive guidance, such as Frequently Asked Questions 
posted online. The Department plans to make any official guidance 
publicly available to help potentially regulated parties better 
understand the regulations.
    One commenter also asked whether the responsibility for seeking 
advisory opinions lies with U.S. companies handling a transaction, or 
with foreign companies conducting business with U.S. companies. The 
decision to seek an advisory opinion from the Department about a 
specific, non-hypothetical transaction is entirely voluntary, and only 
U.S. persons who are parties to a transaction that the rule potential 
regulates, or an agent of that U.S. person-party, may seek an advisory 
opinion from the Department. Also, in implementing this rule, the 
Department is committed to continuing its robust engagement and 
outreach with stakeholders and foreign partners, which may identify 
broader issues appropriate for clarification in public guidance.

I. Subpart J--Due Diligence and Audit Requirements

    The Order delegates to the Attorney General, in consultation with 
relevant agencies, the full extent of the authority granted to the 
President by IEEPA as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the 
purposes of the Order,\196\ and it expressly directs the Department's 
rule to ``address the need for, as appropriate, recordkeeping and 
reporting of transactions to inform investigative, enforcement, and 
regulatory efforts.'' \197\ As the Department stated in the NPRM, it is 
critical to maximize widespread compliance with the rule and to gather 
the information necessary to administer and enforce the program, 
without unduly burdening U.S. persons or discouraging data transactions 
that the program is not intended to address.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \196\ 89 FR 15423.
    \197\ 89 FR 15424.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Section 202.1001--Due Diligence for Restricted Transactions
    The NPRM proposed imposing affirmative due diligence requirements 
as a condition of engaging in a restricted transaction. The NPRM also 
proposed know-your-data requirements, which specifically require that 
U.S. persons engaging in restricted transactions develop and implement 
data compliance programs with risk-based procedures for verifying data 
transactions, including the types and volumes of data involved in the 
transactions, the identity of the transaction parties, and the end-use 
of the data. The NPRM proposed affirmative recordkeeping requirements 
as a condition of engaging in a restricted transaction, and it required 
U.S. persons subject to these affirmative requirements to maintain 
documentation of their due diligence, in order to assist in inspections 
and enforcement, and to maintain the results of annual audits that 
verify their compliance with the security requirements and, where 
relevant, the license conditions to which the U.S. persons may be 
subject.
    One commenter raised an unsubstantiated concern about the 
recordkeeping and due diligence requirements associated with restricted 
transactions, making a blanket assertion that the application of such 
requirements would be inconceivable for restricted transactions. As a 
solution to this unsubstantiated concern, the commenter requested that 
the Department replace the proposed requirements with an information-
sharing framework like the ones utilized by customs authorities with 
respect to supply-chain risk. Specifically, this commenter suggested 
that the Department replicate the approach taken by the Customs-Trade 
Partnership Against Terrorism, which the commenter described as a 
public-private partnership pioneered by DHS to protect the U.S. supply 
chain in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. 
Under this partnership, the commenter noted, U.S. companies voluntarily 
invested in improving their digital and other supply chain security 
processes, and agreed to share information with the United States 
Government, in exchange for a series of regulatory incentives. The 
Department declines to make this change for several reasons.
    First, the Department lacks discretion under the Order to convert 
the rule to a voluntary public-private partnership or information-
sharing program. The Order directs the Department to issue a rule 
prohibiting and restricting classes of transactions that pose an 
unacceptable risk of enabling countries of concern or covered persons 
to access government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data, 
and that meet certain other criteria.
    Second, a voluntary information-sharing partnership would not 
address the unacceptable risks to national security and foreign policy 
at the heart of the Order. As explained in the NPRM and part IV of this 
preamble, these risks are externalities that derive in large part from 
U.S. persons' choices to share government-related data and bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data with countries of concern and covered persons 
that they can leverage to exploit that data. Like other national 
security risks and threats, the data security risks addressed by the 
Order and this rule result from the failure of the private market to 
adequately internalize and account for these collective national 
security and foreign policy costs. Unlike this rule, a voluntary 
information-sharing program would not correct that externality because 
such a program would allow U.S. persons to continue to choose to engage 
in covered data transactions that pose these unacceptable risks.
    The same is true of the specific recordkeeping and other due 
diligence requirements for restricted transactions. Recordkeeping, 
security, and due diligence requirements were contemplated as key 
mitigative components of restricted transactions in both the ANPRM and 
NPRM, providing the public with ample opportunity to raise 
substantiated concerns. The recordkeeping, security, and due diligence 
requirements are designed to address national security and foreign 
policy threats that arise when countries of concern and covered persons 
access government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data 
that may be implicated by the categories of restricted transactions. 
The requirements are specifically tailored to those risks. The 
commenter does not describe how--even if their concern were 
substantiated--replacing the recordkeeping and other due diligence 
requirements with a voluntary information-sharing program would 
mitigate such national security and

[[Page 1696]]

foreign policy threats. The commenter also does not explain how a 
voluntary information-sharing program would adequately enable the 
Department to monitor compliance with the rule, investigate potential 
violations, and enforce the rule, or ensure that U.S. persons are 
taking adequate steps to closely monitor their compliance with the rule 
given the risks posed by ongoing restricted transactions. The 
Department believes that these requirements are a critical part of 
mitigating the unacceptable risks posed by these transactions.
    Third, the rule creates mechanisms for the Department to provide 
official guidance or written advisory opinions in response to specific 
inquiries received through advisory opinion procedures. As part of this 
system, the Department also plans to make any official guidance 
publicly available to help potentially regulated parties better 
understand the regulations and the Department's interpretation of the 
regulations and the Order. The system will assist regulated parties in 
their application of the regulation's recordkeeping and due diligence 
requirements to specific, non-hypothetical factual scenarios.
    Another commenter generally claimed that the final rule will impose 
significant compliance burdens on U.S. companies. The due diligence 
requirements for engaging in restricted transactions and the 
recordkeeping requirements that apply to both prohibited and restricted 
transactions are based on existing compliance expectations set by other 
regulators, such as OFAC and BIS, for screening vendors and transaction 
counterparties.
    Another commenter claimed that costs to businesses for Know Your 
Customer (``KYC'') due diligence are generally already high, and that 
unclear requirements will add to business costs and frustration. The 
commenter stated that some information, such as an entity's residence 
or country of incorporation, may be easy to obtain, but the extent to 
which an entity is subject to the influence or control of a country of 
concern or covered person may not be readily apparent. Again, the 
Department cannot address this commenter's concerns because the 
commenter did not provide any specific information or justification for 
why the proposed rule's KYC requirements are unclear. However, as 
explained in the NPRM, the proposed rule does not require U.S. persons 
to determine whether an entity is controlled or subject to the 
influence of a country of concern. Regulated parties have the duty to 
determine whether entities or individuals meet the definitions of 
covered persons set forth in Sec.  202.211(a)(1) through (4), none of 
which include control or influence. Rather, the Department will 
determine whether an entity is subject to the direction or control of a 
country of concern or covered person and, if so, will publicly 
designate them as a covered person. For this fifth category of covered 
persons, U.S. businesses need only rely on the published Covered 
Persons List when conducting due diligence.
    Another commenter asserted that the proposed rule's due diligence, 
reporting and auditing requirements would impose a substantial 
administrative burden, and they recommended that the Department view 
due diligence requirements in proportion to the degree of risk 
associated with a covered data transaction. For example, the commenter 
suggested that due diligence for ``lower-risk'' transactions could 
include streamlined measures such as contractual safeguards and 
automated review of counterparties' technical indicators, such as IP 
address locations. As the Department discussed in the NPRM, the 
Department will encourage U.S. persons subject to the proposed rule to 
develop, implement, and update compliance programs as appropriate.\198\ 
Although the Department may issue guidance to assist U.S. persons to 
develop and implement compliance programs, the compliance program 
suitable for a particular U.S. person would be based on that person's 
individualized risk profile and would vary depending on a variety of 
factors, including the U.S. person's size and sophistication, products 
and services, customers and counterparties, and geographic locations. 
Depending on a U.S. person's individualized risk profile, a reasonable 
compliance program could include streamlined measures such as 
contractual safeguards and automated review of counterparties' 
technical indicators, such as IP address locations.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \198\ 89 FR 86152-53.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Another commenter stated that multinational companies already have 
robust data privacy and export control programs that may be leveraged 
to comply with the rule, arguing that companies should not be required 
to set up entirely new compliance programs and should leverage existing 
compliance infrastructure to the extent feasible. Another commenter 
echoed the view that companies should be able to leverage existing 
privacy and data security programs. The Department strongly agrees. 
Nothing in the rule requires companies to set up new compliance 
programs where they already have such programs that otherwise meet the 
requirements of the rule. The Department expects that many companies 
will adapt their existing compliance programs to respond to the rule's 
requirements.
    One commenter asserted, without support, that the proposed rule's 
due diligence requirements are akin to requiring that Post Offices read 
the mail of U.S. citizens and produce reports to law enforcement on 
what they have read. The commenter questioned whether the proposed rule 
conforms with the U.S. Constitution, described the due diligence and 
reporting requirements as a ``surveillance mandate,'' asserted that the 
rule contains serious civil rights concerns, and flagged that the NPRM 
docket did not reflect input from entities like the Department of 
State's Bureau of Democracy and Human Rights, the American Civil 
Liberties Union, or Freedom House.
    This comment distorted and mischaracterized the rule in conclusory 
ways without any specificity or analysis of the rule itself. First, as 
explained in part L of this preamble, the ANPRM, NPRM, and this rule 
each resulted from extensive, robust formal and informal interagency 
review and input from dozens of agencies (including the State 
Department), White House offices, and other Executive Branch entities.
    Second, the rule exempts from its coverage expressive information 
or informational materials and personal communications, among other 
things, and is consistent with the First Amendment, as discussed in 
part IV.D.1 of this preamble.
    Third, the rule's due diligence and reporting requirements are 
tailored to ensure compliance and help inform the Department's 
administration of the program. The rule affirmatively requires due 
diligence and annual audits only for U.S. persons engaging in 
restricted transactions, and the due diligence requirements are similar 
to the elements of companies' compliance programs in the sanctions 
compliance and export controls contexts (although, in contrast to 
sanctions, which impose strict liability for violations, the rule's 
prohibitions include a knowledge standard). See Sec.  202.1002. The 
rule requires reports only for a certain subset of restricted 
transactions that raise heightened risks, or where U.S. entities 
receive and reject offers to engage in a prohibited transaction 
involving data brokerage to help inform the Department about entities 
engaging in data brokerage that may be seeking to

[[Page 1697]]

undermine or violate the rules. See Sec.  202.1104. And much of the 
rule's recordkeeping requirements are in line with documents that 
businesses already keep, such as access logs.
    Other than breezily using the buzzwords ``surveillance mandate'' to 
mischaracterize the rule's compliance requirements, the commenter did 
not describe what civil rights or constitutional concerns the proposed 
rule raises. The American Civil Liberties Union provided a comment to 
the proposed rule and did not raise the concerns asserted by the 
commenter. And although all members of the public had the opportunity 
to comment on the ANPRM and NPRM, Freedom House did not submit a 
comment. The commenter's buzzwords and unsupported accusations have no 
basis in the rule itself and provide no reason to alter the rule.
2. Section 202.1002--Audits for Restricted Transactions
    The NPRM proposed imposing an annual audit requirement as a 
condition of engaging in a restricted transaction to verify and improve 
compliance with the security requirements. Section 202.1002(f) of the 
NPRM proposed requiring an auditor to submit a written report that 
describes the audit methodology, including ``the policies and other 
documents reviewed, personnel interviewed, and any facilities, 
equipment, networks, or systems examined.'' \199\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \199\ 89 FR 86224.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter requested that the Department change this provision 
to insert the terms ``relevant'' before the terms ``policies,'' 
``personnel,'' and ``facilities'' to ensure that auditors do not 
randomly review all the documents, personnel, or equipment of relevant 
parties. This comment appears to misinterpret the audit section of the 
proposed rule by reading Sec.  202.1002(f) in isolation from Sec.  
202.1002's other provisions. Section 202.1002(e) of the proposed rule 
defined the scope of the audit and was already limited to focus only on 
activities covered by the proposed rule. In contrast, Sec.  202.1002(f) 
addressed only what an auditor must include in the audit report.\200\ 
It does not require an auditor to review all of a companies' policies, 
interview all its personnel, or examine all its facilities, equipment, 
networks or systems. However, to ensure that the regulatory text is 
clear, the final rule adds the term ``relevant'' to Sec.  
202.1002(f)(2)(ii) to clarify that the audit report must describe only 
the relevant policies, personnel interviewed, and facilities, 
equipment, networks or systems examined by the auditor.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \200\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    A couple of commenters expressed concerns that the proposed rule 
did not include protections for confidentiality and trade secrets 
contained in reports and audits from either public disclosure or 
evidentiary use. It is unclear why the commenter thinks that the 
Department would not use an audit report as evidentiary support for an 
enforcement action if the report demonstrates a company's failure to 
comply with the rule. The audit report is one of the ways that the 
Department seeks to impose broad compliance with the rule. As for 
confidentiality, the Department would be bound by existing legal 
requirements regarding the protection of confidential or proprietary 
information.\201\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \201\ See, e.g., 28 CFR 16.7.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    A number of commenters requested that companies be allowed to use 
audits completed for other purposes to comply with the final rule to 
avoid imposing significant compliance burdens on companies. The 
Department agrees with these comments and notes that the proposed rule 
required that a company conduct an audit of its compliance with the 
proposed rule, but it did not require that a company conduct a separate 
audit to comply with the audit requirements. The final rule does not 
include that requirement, either. However, the audit must specifically, 
sufficiently, and expressly address the requirements set forth in the 
rule.
    Multiple commenters requested that companies be allowed to use 
internal auditors to audit compliance with the rule and reduce their 
compliance burden for restricted transaction. In the Department's 
extensive experience with corporate compliance in national security, 
criminal, and other contexts, internal audits often lack the 
independence, expertise, and resources to conduct objective and 
thorough evaluations of their own company's compliance efforts, while 
external audits often provide more effective and comprehensive 
assessments. However, the Department recognizes that, with the 
appropriate independence, expertise, and resources, internal audits may 
also be effective and may be a sensible part of a compliance program, 
depending on the U.S. company's individualized risk profile. The 
Department has thus updated the rule to delete the requirement that 
audits be ``external'' to allow internal audits that are otherwise 
sufficiently ``independent.'' The Department intends to provide 
additional guidance on the requirements for a sufficiently independent 
audit after the final rule is published.
    One commenter suggested that the Department adopt a self-
certification system akin to the Data Privacy Framework, and that the 
Department allow for third-party reviews as a condition for engaging in 
restricted transactions. Although the Department appreciates the value 
of certifications to privacy regimes such as the Data Privacy 
Framework, it does not find self-certifications sufficient to ensure 
compliance given the national security risks to government-related data 
and bulk U.S. sensitive personal data that the rule seeks to address. 
The audit provisions set forth in Sec.  202.1002 are tailored to ensure 
compliance with the rule, including the security requirements, and to 
ensure that auditors have the requisite independence to effectively 
assess compliance.
    One commenter claimed that the audit requirement in the proposed 
rule is unnecessarily broad because it would apply to all data 
transactions, straying beyond the national security concerns behind the 
proposed rule and imposing challenging requirements on U.S. companies. 
The commenter suggested that the Department consider a risk-based 
approach to auditing that takes into account the sensitivity of the 
data and the nature of transactions and counterparties, rather than 
imposing a uniform, annual auditing cadence for all restricted 
transactions. A few commenters also stated that an annual auditing 
requirement was burdensome. One commenter suggested that companies be 
allowed to conduct random spot audits, or that the Department require 
audits for companies engaged in high volumes of restricted 
transactions. Another commenter suggested that companies only be 
required to conduct audits after determining that they are not in 
compliance with the rule.
    The audit requirement in the proposed rule explicitly applies only 
to U.S. persons engaging in restricted transactions; it does not apply 
broadly to all U.S. persons engaging in data transactions. No change is 
necessary to clarify this point. However, the Department appreciates 
that the scope of the audit provision in the NPRM's proposed Sec.  
202.1002(e)(1) could be read to apply to all data transactions, even 
those outside the scope of the rule, and has revised the terminology in 
Sec.  202.1002(e)(1) in the final rule to clarify that the scope of the 
audit must examine a U.S. person's restricted transactions, not all 
their data transactions, and has revised

[[Page 1698]]

Sec.  202.1002(f)(2) to clarify that the audit report need only address 
the nature of a U.S. person's restricted transactions. The Department 
expects that an auditor would need to review a U.S. entity's procedures 
for determining whether transactions are restricted, prohibited, or 
exempt to ensure that the entity is appropriately identifying and 
handling restricted transactions. Once the auditing requirement is 
triggered, the rule would require the auditor to examine the data 
transactions engaged in by a U.S. person that it has identified as 
restricted transactions and determine whether the data transactions 
satisfy the CISA security requirements and other compliance 
obligations.
    The proposed rule already took into account the sensitivity and 
nature of the transactions and counterparties by limiting the scope of 
the proposed rule's restrictions to countries of concern or covered 
persons, and by including bulk thresholds that trigger the rule's 
requirements. The Department believes that annual audits are necessary 
for U.S. persons to stay current with their data transactions and the 
security measures put in place to protect that data. Spot audits would 
provide only a snapshot in time and would not provide a company 
guidance about adequate remedial measures that they must take to come 
into compliance with the rule. Although one commenter noted that 
agencies monitoring CFIUS mitigation agreements often do not require 
annual audits, the commenter does not appear to consider that CFIUS 
mitigation agreements may contain other reporting obligations that can 
apprise CFIUS monitoring agencies, on a potentially regular basis, 
about a company's compliance with CFIUS mitigation without the need for 
an annual audit. The rule does not contain comparable reporting 
obligations. Furthermore, without auditing, it is unclear how a U.S. 
entity would adequately determine whether it is in compliance with the 
rule. For these reasons, the Department makes no changes on this issue.

J. Subpart K--Reporting and Recordkeeping Requirements

1. Section 202.1101--Records and Recordkeeping Requirements
    The NPRM proposed requiring any U.S. person engaging in a 
restricted transaction to keep full and accurate records of each 
restricted transaction and to keep these records available for 
examination for at least 10 years after the date of each transaction 
(the length of the statute of limitations for violations of IEEPA). The 
proposed rule described the required records in detail, which include a 
written policy describing the compliance program, a written policy 
documenting implementation of the security measures for restricted 
transactions, the results of any audits to evaluate compliance with the 
security measures, documentation of the due diligence conducted to 
verify the data flow involved in any restricted transaction, and other 
pertinent information regarding each transaction.
    One commenter repeated their claim from the ANPRM that this 
provision amounts to real-time, U.S. law enforcement-directed 
monitoring of data transmissions of private citizens and companies. 
This comment has no basis in the rule. As the NPRM explained, nothing 
in the rule, on its face or in practice, requires U.S. companies to 
surveil their employees, customers, or other private entities. All that 
Sec.  202.1101 does is require U.S. persons that engage in restricted 
transactions to have and implement a risk-based compliance program, a 
common feature in sanctions, export controls, anti-money laundering, 
privacy, and a host of national security and other laws.
    The EU's GDPR, for example, requires every data controller to 
``maintain a record of the processing activities under its 
responsibility,'' including ``the purposes of the processing,'' ``a 
description of the categories of data subjects and of the categories of 
personal data,'' ``the categories of recipients to whom the personal 
data have been or will be disclosed including recipients in third 
countries or international organisations,'' ``where applicable, 
transfers of personal data to a third country or an international 
organisation, including the identification of that third country or 
international organisation and, in the case of transfers referred to in 
the second subparagraph of Article 49(1), the documentation of suitable 
safeguards,'' ``where possible, the envisaged time limits for erasure 
of the different categories of data,'' and ``where possible, a general 
description of the technical and organisational security measures 
referred to in Article 32(1).'' \202\ The GDPR also requires data 
processors to similarly ``maintain a record of all categories of 
processing activities carried out on behalf of a controller.'' \203\ 
And the GDPR requires data controllers and processors to make these 
records available to the relevant government authorities on 
request.\204\ Similarly, the California Privacy Rights Act requires the 
issuance of regulations ``requiring businesses whose processing of 
consumers' personal information presents significant risk to consumers' 
privacy or security'' to, among other things, ``perform a cybersecurity 
audit on an annual basis, including defining the scope of the audit and 
establishing a process to ensure that audits are thorough and 
independent,'' and ``submit to the California Privacy Protection Agency 
on a regular basis a risk assessment with respect to their processing 
of personal information.'' \205\ Other State privacy laws require 
similar audits, data protection assessments, and reporting.\206\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \202\ Regulation (EU) 2016/679, supra note 153, art. 30(1).
    \203\ Id., art. 30(2).
    \204\ Id., art. 30(4).
    \205\ Cal. Civ. Code sec. 1798.185(a)(15).
    \206\ See, e.g., Colo. Rev. Stat. 6-1-1302(c), 6-1-1309; 4 Colo. 
Code Reg. 904-3, Part 8; Conn. Gen. Stat. 42-522.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    It is unclear why the commenter believes that similarly requiring 
U.S. persons to monitor their own transactions and their own compliance 
with this rule, and to use an audit to double-check their compliance 
and identify areas of non-compliance, equates to a surreptitious law-
enforcement surveillance dragnet. The rule has nothing do to with the 
United States Government's authorities to lawfully engage in law 
enforcement and national security activities to gather intelligence. 
Personal communications, expressive information, and metadata 
ordinarily associated with expressive materials (or that is reasonably 
necessary to enable the transmission or dissemination of expressive 
materials) are specifically excluded from the scope of the rule. And 
the rule does not regulate purely domestic transactions between U.S. 
persons, like the collection, maintenance, processing, or use of data 
by U.S. persons within the United States (unless one of those persons 
is a publicly designated covered person).
    Nor do the recordkeeping, reporting, or other requirements of the 
rule amount to a mechanism for the Federal Government to obtain access 
to the underlying data of U.S. persons. Nothing in the rule requires 
regulated parties to submit the underlying sensitive personal data to 
the Federal Government. For example, the annual reporting requirement 
in Sec.  202.1103 for certain restricted transactions and the 
requirement in Sec.  202.1104 to report certain rejected transactions 
require only a top-level description of the covered data transaction, 
such as the ``types and volumes'' of data involved in the transaction 
and the ``method of data transfer.'' The Department expects that

[[Page 1699]]

U.S. persons will fulfill these requirements by including only 
generalized statements in the report, such as ``15,000 U.S. persons' 
human genomic data transferred by file transfer protocol,'' without 
providing any of the underlying data.
    To be sure, there may be limited circumstances in which the 
Department may need greater details about the underlying sensitive 
personal data, such as if a company seeks an advisory opinion about 
whether a certain kind of data meets one of the definitions for a 
category of sensitive personal data, or if a U.S. person applies for a 
specific license and adjudicating that license requires more details 
about the kinds of data that are the subject of the transaction, or if 
a company's non-compliance with the rule and any enforcement action 
turns on a dispute over the data itself. But in the Department's 
experience, even those limited circumstances should ordinarily be 
resolvable without needing access to the underlying data itself--such 
as through asking questions about the nature of the data to the 
parties, similar to what occurs in other national-security processes 
such as CFIUS and the Committee for the Assessment of Foreign 
Participation in the United States Telecommunications Services Sector.
    Several commenters suggested that the Department include rules to 
protect companies' confidential information, proprietary information, 
or trade secrets to ensure that such information will not be publicly 
disclosed or used for evidentiary purposes. No change was made in 
response to this comment. These kinds of protections are already 
enshrined in other, longstanding laws (such as the Freedom of 
Information Act and Trade Secrets Act), and the rule will comply with 
them to the extent that they apply. Creating additional restrictions on 
the disclosure or use of such information is unnecessary and could 
undermine the Department's ability to investigate potential violations 
of the rule and enforce it.
    Another commenter observed that many U.S. companies do not transact 
in data, but rather their data movement is part of a system or 
workflow. According to the commenter, the rule's recordkeeping 
requirements presume that companies have identified and isolated all 
discrete restricted transactions, but that is far more burdensome to do 
when data are part of globally integrated workflows. They described an 
example in which an engineer at a company responsible for product 
development or de-bugging may have routine access to user data and 
claim that those workflows make it more practical and cost-effective to 
more broadly adopt the requisite security requirements than to apply 
them in a piecemeal fashion. The Department appreciates that this rule 
will result in some compliance costs, but no change appears necessary 
to address this comment. The recordkeeping requirements do not presume 
that U.S. persons engage in only discretely identified restricted 
transactions. Indeed, the comment's suggested approach to its own 
example appears to be a workable solution based on the limited facts 
provided and, depending on the specific circumstances of a company, may 
be how some companies decide to reasonably comply with these 
regulations.
2. Section 202.1102--Reports To Be Furnished on Demand
    The proposed rule included provisions to assist the Department in 
investigating potential noncompliance with the rule. These provisions 
include requiring any U.S. person to furnish under oath, from time to 
time and at any time as may be required by the Attorney General, 
complete information relative to any covered data transaction subject 
to a prohibition or restriction.
    One commenter stated that Sec.  202.1102 is a means for U.S. 
companies to disclose and produce information upon demand to law 
enforcement authorities. No change was made in response to this 
comment. Section 202.1102 merely states the statutory recordkeeping and 
subpoena authority granted to the President and delegated to the 
Department under the Order. It is no different than other IEEPA 
recordkeeping and subpoena authority implemented by the Department of 
the Treasury across its sanctions programs or by the Department of 
Commerce under Executive Orders 13873 and 14034.
    This same commenter also asserts that the requirements of Sec.  
202.1102 would impose significant budgetary expenses on the United 
States Government, which would be tasked with reviewing information on 
what the commenter asserted, without support, are billions of ``low-
risk'' transmissions and millions of low-risk transactions. This 
comment merely repeated this commenter's claim that the restricted 
transactions are ``low risk,'' which has been addressed separately in 
part IV.C.1 of this preamble. The comment provided no specific analysis 
as to the number of non-exempt covered data transactions that are 
subject to the restrictions in this rule or the expenses that the 
commenter believes are required to implement the rule. And nothing in 
the rule establishes a program that requires the Department to review 
and approve data transmissions or transactions in advance. To the 
contrary, a hallmark of risk-based compliance is that the private 
sector, which is best positioned to know its own transactions, is 
responsible for managing its own compliance without the need for 
advance United States Government review and approval of every 
individual transaction undertaken, similar to approaches used for 
sanctions and export controls. While the rule does allow the Department 
to ask for records and institutes discrete reporting requirements for 
rejected transactions and for certain high-risk entities on an annual 
basis, it does not mandate that all such records be produced for the 
Department. The Department declines to make any changes to the rule 
based on this comment.
    The same commenter expressed concern that the reporting provisions 
set out in subpart K could require some regulated entities, such as 
electronic communications services providers subject to the 
restrictions of 18 U.S.C. 2701 et seq., to report information about 
transactions with their customers that Federal law may otherwise 
prohibit in the absence of specified legal process. The Department does 
not take a position regarding the commenter's legal analysis. However, 
the Department does not intend for regulated entities to construe the 
reporting provisions set forth in subpart K to impose reporting 
requirements inconsistent with Federal law. The Department has revised 
the provisions in subpart K to clarify that the reporting requirements 
do not oblige parties to furnish information in reports that Federal 
law would otherwise prohibit.
    Another commenter in the pharmaceutical research field argued that 
their current auditing and recordkeeping measures already adhere to 
much of what is required under the NPRM, and asserted that it would be 
unduly burdensome for them to repeat these efforts. Nothing in the rule 
requires U.S. persons to unnecessarily duplicate their records or 
create redundant systems. U.S. persons can use existing auditing, 
recordkeeping, and other compliance practices and systems to the extent 
that they fully satisfy the requirements of this rule.
3. Section 202.1104--Reports on Rejected Prohibited Transactions
    The NPRM proposed requiring that any U.S. person that has received 
and affirmatively rejected an offer from

[[Page 1700]]

another person to engage in a prohibited transaction must submit a 
report to the Department within 14 business days of rejecting it.
    One commenter noted that a 14-day period for reporting on rejected 
transactions should be extended to a minimum of 30 days. The commenter 
argued that 14 days was too narrow from a compliance standpoint and 
that 30 days would allow companies sufficient time to investigate, 
document, and confirm relevant details about a rejected transaction. 
The Department declines to adopt this suggested change. While the 
Department appreciates the desire for a longer reporting period, the 
proposed 14-day period is consistent with, and indeed longer than, the 
similar reporting period implemented by OFAC, which requires reporting 
on rejected transactions within 10 business days of rejecting such a 
transaction.\207\ These reports will help the Department identify 
instances in which potential countries of concern or covered persons 
seek to enter into prohibited transactions with U.S. persons in 
contravention of the rule, including through evasion. The information 
submitted by these reports will thus assist the Department in 
monitoring U.S. persons' compliance with the rule, identifying matters 
for potential investigation, undertaking enforcement actions, and 
identifying ways in which to refine the rule in the future. 
Additionally, timely reporting of a rejected transaction could, in real 
time, potentially curtail adversaries' future attempts to access 
government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data because 
the Department can promptly uncover conspiracies to evade or avoid the 
rule's prohibitions, identify shell companies and agents, investigate 
targets for designation or enforcement actions, and mitigate 
potentially ongoing threats to U.S. national security, which increase 
the longer a rejected restricted transaction goes unreported. 
Furthermore, lengthening the deadline is unnecessary to allow 
investigation and documentation because Sec.  202.1104(c) already 
limits reports on rejected transactions to the required information 
``to the extent known and available to the person filing the report at 
the time the transaction is rejected.'' The Department thus expects 
that U.S. persons will generally satisfy this reporting requirement by 
filing an initial report with the information known at the time the 
transaction is rejected and supplementing it later with additional 
documentation or relevant details from the results of their 
investigations, or as requested by the Department. The Department thus 
declines to change the timeframe.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \207\ 31 CFR 501.604(c).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

K. Subpart M--Penalties and Finding of Violation

    The NPRM proposed civil and criminal penalties, including a process 
for imposing civil monetary penalties similar to those used in other 
IEEPA-based regimes.
    One commenter requested reduced criminal penalties, noting that the 
penalties of up to 20 years in prison seem ``quite punitive'' for a 
covered data transaction violation. The Department declines to take an 
approach that would create an inconsistency with other penalties 
imposed for IEEPA-based criminal violations. Under IEEPA, criminal 
penalties apply to any person convicted of willfully committing, 
willfully attempting to commit, willfully conspiring to commit, or 
aiding or abetting in the commission of a violation of any license, 
order, regulation, or prohibition issued under IEEPA. The penalties, as 
stated in the NPRM, are commensurate with the willful actions of the 
person on whom the Department imposes such penalties. The Department 
further notes that these penalties are intentionally designed to be 
severe, reflecting the gravity of the national security risks 
associated with violating the rule and its provisions, and are intended 
to deter and prevent violations of the prohibitions. Finally, the 
provisions of IEEPA allow the Department to exercise its discretion. 
Upon conviction, criminal violators may be fined not more than 
$1,000,000, or if a natural person, may be imprisoned for not more than 
20 years, or both. As with all Federal criminal cases, unless a 
criminal penalty has a mandatory minimum sentence (which the rule does 
not), the ultimate penalty, up to the statutory maximum, will be 
imposed by a Federal district judge, who will determine any sentence 
after considering the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines and other statutory 
factors.
    Another commenter recommended that if an entity in compliance with 
the rule makes a voluntary self-disclosure (``VSD'') to the Department 
about a possible violation of the rule, that entity should receive 
``safe harbor'' (presumably from any civil or criminal enforcement 
action, although the commenter did not specify) to encourage proactive 
participation in compliance mechanisms. In that vein, the Department 
intends to publish compliance and enforcement guidance and other 
resources to help the regulated community comply with the rule. Similar 
to guidance published by the Department regarding other VSD 
programs,\208\ the Department anticipates that the guidance and 
resources regarding the rule will cover a variety of issues and will 
likely include a discussion of how the Department will assess VSD.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \208\ See, e.g., U.S. Dep't of Just., Voluntary Self Disclosure 
and Monitor Selection Policies (Mar. 8, 2024), https://www.justice.gov/corporate-crime/voluntary-self-disclosure-and-monitor-selection-policies [https://perma.cc/SQ5N-5ECP]; U.S. Dep't 
of Just., Criminal Division Pilot Program on Voluntary Self-
Disclosures for Individuals (Sept. 19, 2024), https://www.justice.gov/criminal/criminal-division-pilot-program-voluntary-self-disclosures-individuals [https://perma.cc/B845-NM3C].
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

L. Coordination With Other Regulatory Regimes

    The proposed rule discussed three potential areas of overlap 
between the proposed rule and existing regulatory regimes. First, the 
Department considered the potential interaction between this rule's 
application to investment agreements and CFIUS's authority to review 
``covered transactions,'' see generally 50 U.S.C. 4565. Second, the 
Department considered, in consultation with the Federal Trade 
Commission (``FTC'') and other agencies, the potential interaction 
between this rule's application to data-brokerage transactions and 
PADFAA.\209\ Third, the Department considered the potential interaction 
between this rule's application to vendor agreements and any actions 
taken by the Secretary of Commerce under Executive Orders 13873 and 
14034.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \209\ Public Law 118-50, supra note 20.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter recognized the Department's efforts to distinguish 
PADFAA from the proposed rule, but contended that the proposed rule is 
redundant in light of PADFAA, and urged the Department to incorporate 
provisions into the final rule to clarify which agency would take 
primary jurisdiction over activities that violate both PADFAA and this 
final rule. Another commenter urged the Department to coordinate with 
the FTC on enforcement activities because the FTC lacks experience 
addressing national security concerns and is not the appropriate agency 
to identify or determine whether an entity is controlled by a foreign 
adversary. Another commenter requested that the Department sign a 
memorandum of understanding with the FTC to ensure cooperation.
    As the Department discussed in the NPRM, the Department does not 
believe that it would be appropriate to alter the proposed rule's scope 
in light of PADFAA for several reasons.\210\ There

[[Page 1701]]

are significant differences in scope between PADFAA and the proposed 
rule, which the Department set forth in some detail in the NPRM, and 
which the commenters do not address. Although the Department declines 
to set forth which agency would take primary jurisdiction over 
enforcement actions, as the Department explained in the NPRM, the 
Department and the FTC intend to coordinate closely to ensure that 
these authorities are exercised in a harmonized way to minimize any 
conflicting obligations or duplicative enforcement.\211\ For example, 
the Department and the FTC intend to coordinate, as appropriate, on 
licensing decisions and on any potential enforcement actions under 
PADFAA with respect to activities that may be authorized, exempt, or 
licensed under the rule.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \210\ 89 FR 86155.
    \211\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    For related reasons, the Department rejects one commenter's 
suggestion that the Department abandon the rulemaking because the 
enactment of PADFAA makes the President's declaration of an emergency 
unnecessary. As a legal matter, the President's declaration of an 
emergency is unreviewable by a court, and it is not a decision the 
Department is authorized to revisit. And, substantively, the rule 
covers a range of transactions--such as restricted transactions--that 
present the national security threats recognized by the President's 
declaration and the Order and that are entirely outside PADFAA's scope. 
This suggestion also ignores the significant differences in scope and 
structure between the Order and PADFAA, which the NPRM discussed.
    Another commenter renewed a suggestion originally raised as a 
comment to the ANPRM that the Department address additional potential 
overlap between the proposed rule and the ICTS program and its rules 
relevant to sensitive data, the BIS NPRM regarding the requirements for 
Infrastructure as a Service (``IaaS'') providers to verify the identity 
of foreign customers,\212\ and the BIS ANPRM regarding connected 
vehicles.\213\ The Department has already considered and discussed the 
potential interaction between this rule and actions that the Secretary 
of Commerce may take, as authorized by Executive Orders 13873 and 
14034, and the commenter does not engage with the analysis provided in 
the Department's NPRM. Furthermore, the Department of Commerce has not 
yet issued final rules regulating IaaS or connected vehicles, so it 
would be premature to provide an analysis of the ways in which the 
Department's rule interacts with those rules. As noted in the NPRM, the 
Department is committed to working with BIS to ensure a consistent 
approach between the rule's restrictions on vendor agreements and any 
ICTS actions that may overlap.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \212\ Taking Additional Steps To Address the National Emergency 
With Respect to Significant Malicious Cyber-Enabled Activities, 89 
FR 5698 (Jan. 29, 2024) (to be codified at 15 CFR pt. 7).
    \213\ Securing the Information and Communications Technology and 
Services Supply Chain: Connected Vehicles, 89 FR 15066 (Mar. 1, 
2024) (to be codified at 15 CFR pt. 7).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    One commenter argued that, on issues that depend on public and 
private information exchanges with U.S. allies and trading partners--
such as commerce, diplomacy, health, science, and technology--the NPRM 
did not adequately address the damage that would be done to the long-
established regulatory processes and policy interests of other 
agencies, including the Department of Commerce, Department of State, 
and HHS. The Department disagrees. The interagency process to develop 
the Order, ANPRM, and NPRM included review by and consultation with 
dozens of Federal departments and agencies, including those listed by 
the commenter. The Department consulted a broad range of agencies, 
White House offices, and other Executive Branch entities, including the 
Departments of State, Treasury, Defense, Commerce, HHS (including the 
FDA, NIH, and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention), Veterans 
Affairs, and DHS; the U.S. Postal Service; the U.S. Intelligence 
Community; White House offices such as the Office of Pandemic 
Preparedness, OMB (including the Office of Information and Regulatory 
Affairs (``OIRA'')), Office of the National Cyber Director, Domestic 
Policy Council, Council of Economic Advisors, and National Economic 
Council; the National Security Council (including the International 
Economics, Technology & National Security, Global Health Security & 
Biodefense, China, Cyber, and Legal directorates); the Office of the 
U.S. Trade Representative; the FTC; the Federal Communications 
Commission; the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau; the National 
Science Foundation; the SEC; the Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve; the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation; and the Commodity 
Futures Trading Commission. The final rule is a reflection of the 
Department's extensive efforts at whole-of-government coordination. At 
each interval of the rulemaking process, departments and agencies have 
had the opportunity to provide, and have provided, meaningful and 
extensive input to the Order, ANPRM, NPRM, and final rule.
    Another commenter expressed support for the Department's 
coordination with other regulatory regimes, noting that companies 
involved in international trade are already subject to national 
security-related requirements overseen by CFIUS, OFAC, BIS, and other 
entities. The commenter noted that efforts to harmonize the various 
applicable regimes will be greatly beneficial to the companies seeking 
to comply.

M. Severability

    Section 202.106 of the NPRM provided that the provisions of this 
rule are intended to be severable from each other if any provision of 
the final rule is held to be invalid or unenforceable by its terms, or 
as applied to any person or circumstance, or stayed pending further 
agency action or judicial review. The Department did not receive any 
comments on Sec.  202.106 and adopts and slightly amends it, with the 
additional explanation below.
    The Department has determined that this rule implements and is 
fully consistent with governing law, but it recognizes that 
implementation may be subject to legal challenge. The Department 
intends for the provisions of this rule to be severable from each 
other. The Supreme Court has explained that where specific provisions 
of a rule are unlawful, severance is preferred when doing so ``will not 
impair the function of the [rule] as a whole, and there is no 
indication that the regulation would not have been based but for its 
inclusion.'' \214\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \214\ K Mart Corp. v. Cartier, Inc., 486 U.S. 281, 294 (1988); 
see also Sw. Elec. Power Co. v. EPA, 920 F.3d 999, 1033 (5th Cir. 
2019) (vacating only challenged portions of a rule).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    In the event a court holds that any provision in a final 28 CFR 
part 202 is invalid or unenforceable, the Department intends that the 
remaining provisions of a final 28 CFR part 202, as relevant, would 
continue in effect to the greatest extent possible. In addition, if a 
court holds that any such provision is invalid or unenforceable as to a 
particular person or circumstance, the Department intends that the 
provision would remain in effect as to any other person or 
circumstance. Each provision of the final rule and application thereof 
serves an important, related, but distinct purpose; provides a distinct 
benefit separate from, and in addition to, the benefit provided by 
other provisions and applications; is supported by evidence and 
findings that stand independent of each other; and is

[[Page 1702]]

capable of operating independently such that the invalidity of any 
particular provision or application would not undermine the operability 
or usefulness of other aspects of the final rule. Depending on the 
circumstances and the scope of a court's order, remaining provisions of 
a final rule likely could continue to function sensibly independent of 
any provision or application held invalid or unenforceable. Although 
more limited application may change the magnitude of the overall 
benefit of the final rule, it would not undermine the important benefit 
of, and justification for, the final rule's application to other 
persons or circumstances. The qualitative and quantitative benefits of 
the final rule outweigh the costs for all persons and circumstances 
covered by the final rule.
    For example, the prohibitions and restrictions related to 
transactions involving access to personal health data should continue 
to apply even if a court holds that the restrictions or prohibitions on 
transactions involving access to biometric data are invalid. Similarly, 
the rest of the conditions required for U.S. persons to engage in 
restricted transactions with a country of concern or covered person 
should continue to apply even if a court holds that one set of 
conditions (such as the recordkeeping requirements) are invalid. The 
rule should also continue to apply with respect to other countries of 
concern (such as North Korea) or categories of covered persons even if 
a court finds its application with respect to one country of concern 
(such as Russia) or one category of covered persons is invalid. The 
Department's intent that sections and provisions of the final rule can 
function independently similarly applies to the other portions of the 
rule.

N. Other Comments

    One commenter recommended that the Department consider amending the 
rule to require Federal agencies to implement universal opt-out 
mechanisms (``UOOMs'') on government devices at the operating system 
level and that the Department ``work with state enforcers to ensure 
website and application compliance.'' According to this commenter, such 
mechanisms would prevent applications from accessing specific data on 
government devices and send a signal requesting websites and apps not 
to sell or share user data with third parties. This commenter remarked 
that such an amendment would offer a proactive approach to data 
protection that complements the rule's restrictions on certain data 
transactions by preventing sensitive government data from entering 
vulnerable data ecosystems in the first place.
    While the Department appreciates this commenter's recommendation, 
the Order and this rule do not regulate the United States Government's 
own activities, including the operation of its own devices, as made 
clear by section 8 of the Order. This limitation would preclude the 
Department from requiring a UOOM on United States Government devices at 
the operating system level, as the commenter suggested. However, the 
Department has shared this recommendation with CISA and others within 
the United States Government that are focused on securing sensitive 
personal data on the United States Government's own systems and 
devices.
    One commenter ``agree[d] that there needs to be regulation, 
including to a greater extent, of U.S. data,'' but noted that ``the 
rule falls short of an effective law.'' Another commenter noted that in 
light of the glaring need for national data protection against threats 
from abroad and recent data breaches, this rule may not go far enough, 
but it at least serves to set the foundation for a ``much needed wall 
against continued foreign threats.'' While the Department appreciates 
the concept raised by these commenters, the Order only authorizes the 
Department to promulgate regulations that prohibit or otherwise 
restrict transactions that present an unacceptable risk to national 
security by affording countries of concern or covered persons with 
access to government-related data and bulk U.S. sensitive personal 
data. As the Department has publicly explained, this rule is one key 
part of a broader solution to make it more difficult for countries of 
concern to obtain Americans' sensitive personal data. While this rule 
is focused on one set of risk vectors (access through commercial 
activities), other risk vectors such as theft and computer intrusions 
must necessarily be addressed by other complementary national security, 
cybersecurity, and privacy measures.

V. Regulatory Requirements

    The Department designated the proposed rule as ``significant'' 
under Executive Order 12866, as amended.\215\ Upon review, OIRA agreed 
with this designation. The Department has likewise designated this 
final rule as ``significant'' under Executive Order 12866, as amended, 
and OIRA has similarly concurred with that designation. Accordingly, 
this rule includes a Final Regulatory Impact Analysis (``FRIA'') and a 
Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (``FRFA''), as required by 
Executive Order 12866, as amended, and the Regulatory Flexibility 
Act,\216\ respectively. Part V.A of this preamble summarizes the FRIA. 
The full version of the FRIA is available on regulations.gov (Docket 
No. NSD-104).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \215\ E.O. 12866, 58 FR 51735 (Sept. 30, 1993).
    \216\ 5 U.S.C. 601 et seq.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

A. Executive Orders 12866 (Regulatory Planning and Review) as Amended 
by Executive Orders 13563 (Improving Regulation and Regulatory Review) 
and 14094 (Modernizing Regulatory Review)

    Pursuant to the requirements of Executive Order 12866, as amended, 
at section 6(a)(3)(C), the Department has prepared an FRIA of the 
potential economic impacts of this rule and placed the FRIA on this 
rule's docket on regulations.gov (Docket No. NSD-104). The FRIA 
evaluates the potential economic impacts of this final rule on entities 
in the United States that are likely to be affected by the rule.
    The Department requested comments on the Initial Regulatory Impact 
Analysis (``IRIA''), including the economic impact of the proposed 
rule. The Department received several comments directed to the IRIA. A 
summary of and response to those comments are contained in the full 
FRIA that is found on regulations.gov.
    The Department estimates the discounted annualized cost of the 
regulation to be approximately $459 million annually. The extremely 
high potential net benefits (i.e., expected benefits less estimated 
costs) justify moving forward with the rule. The approximately $459 
million in estimated annual cost would significantly protect U.S. 
national security, including well over 100 million American individuals 
who are potential targets of adversaries exploiting government-related 
data and bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. While the benefits to 
national security are difficult to quantify, the Department expects 
them to be substantial, including preventing the use of data by 
countries of concern and covered persons to micro-target U.S. persons, 
to aggregate insights from large datasets to target United States 
Government and private-sector activities, and to enhance military 
capabilities that include facilitating the development of bioweapons. 
Meanwhile, the estimated annual cost of the regulation is very low 
relative to the relevant economic activity. For example, the 
approximately $459 million in estimated annual cost of the rule is only 
about one-third of 1

[[Page 1703]]

percent (0.3 percent) of the $176 billion in revenues generated in the 
U.S. Computing, Infrastructure, Data Processing Services, and Web 
Hosting Services industry sector. The Department therefore expects that 
the national security and foreign policy benefits, while qualitative, 
will far outweigh the estimated costs of the final rule.
    Although, as the FRIA notes, the monetary value of the data sold to 
countries of concern appears to represent a relatively small percentage 
of the overall value of all such transactions from U.S. entities, the 
data that is sold--especially when it is government-related data or 
bulk U.S. sensitive personal data--presents significant risks to U.S. 
persons and to U.S. national security. As explained more fully in part 
II of this preamble, countries of concern seek to obtain government-
related data and bulk U.S. sensitive personal data for malicious uses 
that undermine the national security and foreign policy of the United 
States.
    Overall, the Department estimates that this rule may directly 
financially impact approximately 3,000 companies engaged in data 
brokerage and an additional 1,500 firms that currently engage in 
restricted transactions involving government-related data and bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data with covered persons. This is a relatively 
small fraction of the overall number of U.S. firms engaged in 
transactions involving bulk data, as the rule only affects those 
specific types of commercial transactions identified in the rule that 
involve access to government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data by the six identified countries of concern, or by covered 
persons. These annual costs may include lost and forgone transactions, 
the cost of deploying the CISA security requirements for restricted 
transactions, and the direct costs of compliance. Many of the 
compliance costs that regulated entities will incur due to the rule are 
one-time costs, such as initial assessments and remediation efforts, 
that will be needed only once to come into initial compliance with the 
rule's requirements. Other costs, such as monitoring, compliance 
audits, reporting, and training, will occur annually.
    As the FRIA explains, the Department cannot assess whether any 
secondary impacts or indirect costs of this rule are reasonably likely 
given the limitations of available information, the resulting 
uncertainty, and the qualifications surrounding the analysis. Such 
impacts and costs are still too speculative and hypothetical to be 
quantified in this analysis. Even assuming, however, that such impacts 
and costs were reasonably likely and could be reasonably estimated, the 
Department would still conclude that the high qualitative and 
quantitative benefits to national security and foreign policy of this 
rule would outweigh the estimated impacts and costs. Additionally, the 
rule includes 11 exemptions that allow notable categories of commercial 
transactions to continue unimpeded by the rule's prohibitions and 
restrictions, and that reduce the overall costs of the rule. See 
Sec. Sec.  202.501 through 202.511. Sections 202.800 through 202.803 
further provide a mechanism for entities to obtain licenses for 
otherwise restricted or prohibited transactions.
    Finally, the FRIA identifies both the baseline for the Department's 
cost estimates of the potential impact of the rule, as well as the 
assumptions used to determine that potential impact. These assumptions 
include estimates of the number of potentially impacted parties, the 
costs of compliance, and the number of potentially affected 
transactions. These assumptions are necessary because, as a new 
regulatory program, there is little data publicly available about the 
markets impacted by this rule. The assumptions are also over-inclusive 
in terms of the impact estimates because they rely on North American 
Industry Classification System (``NAICS'') codes that include entities 
likely not impacted by the rule, as well as transactions that will be 
exempted from the rule's prohibitions and restrictions. Nonetheless, 
the assumptions provide a best estimate of both the estimated costs and 
expected benefits of the rule, given available economic information. 
The FRIA also includes updated dollar amounts for various estimated 
impacts, most notably for the estimated total annual costs of 
compliance for this rule as well as the 10-year annualized cost 
estimates. The new figures are lower, though not significantly, than 
those projected in the IRIA included in the NPRM. The changes do not 
reflect substantially new data or analyses, but rather provide greater 
accuracy to the tables by correcting for previous rounding errors and 
unifying the data.

B. Regulatory Flexibility Act

    The Department promulgates this rule to address the growing threat 
posed by the efforts of foreign adversaries to access and exploit 
government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data, as 
articulated in the Order. In particular, the Order directs the Attorney 
General to, among other things, determine which classes of data 
transactions ought to be prohibited due to the unacceptable risk they 
pose by allowing countries of concern or covered persons to access 
government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. The Order 
also directs the Attorney General to work with relevant agencies to 
identify countries of concern and classes of covered persons, establish 
a process to issue licenses authorizing transactions that would 
otherwise be prohibited or restricted transactions, address the need 
for requirements for recordkeeping and reporting transactions, and 
determine which classes of transactions will be required to comply with 
separate security requirements. The need for this rule is articulated 
in part II of and throughout this preamble. Briefly, advances in 
computing technology, AI, and methods for processing large datasets 
allow countries of concern to more effectively leverage for malicious 
purposes government-related or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data they 
have purchased or collected. The capability currently exists to allow 
anyone, including countries of concern, who have access to government-
related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data to combine and 
manipulate it in ways that could identify sensitive personal data, 
including personal identifiers and precise geolocation information.
1. Succinct Statement of the Objectives of, and Legal Basis for, the 
Rule
    Through the Order, the President used his authority under IEEPA and 
the NEA to declare national emergencies and regulate certain types of 
economic transactions to protect the country against foreign threats. 
The Order expands upon the national emergency previously declared by 
Executive Order 13873, as modified by Executive Order 14034. 
Furthermore, the President, under title 3, section 301 of the U.S. 
Code, authorized the Attorney General, in consultation with the heads 
of relevant executive agencies, to employ the President's powers 
granted by IEEPA as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the 
purposes of the Order.
    IEEPA empowers the President to ``deal with any unusual and 
extraordinary threat, which has its source in whole or substantial part 
outside the United States, to the national security, foreign policy, or 
economy of the United States,'' including by investigating, blocking, 
prohibiting, and regulating transactions involving ``any property in 
which any foreign country or a national thereof has any interest by any 
person, or with respect to any property, subject to the

[[Page 1704]]

jurisdiction of the United States.'' \217\ Existing IEEPA-based 
programs include those administered by OFAC, which enforces economic 
and trade sanctions, and the BIS Office of Information and 
Communications Technology and Services, which is responsible for 
information and communications technology and services supply chain 
security.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \217\ 50 U.S.C. 1701(a), 1702(a)(1)(B).
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. Description of and, Where Feasible, an Estimate of the Number of 
Small Entities to Which the Rule Will Apply
    The rule will affect data-brokerage firms and other firms engaged 
in covered data transactions that pose a risk of exposing government-
related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data to countries of 
concern or covered persons. The Department has estimated that about 
4,500 firms, just over 90 percent of which are small businesses 
(``small entities''), will be impacted by the rule. Therefore, the 
Department estimates that this rule will impact approximately 4,050 
small entities and approximately 450 firms that would not be classified 
as small entities.
    Small entities, as defined by the Regulatory Flexibility Act,\218\ 
include small businesses, small nonprofit organizations, and small 
governmental jurisdictions. The definition of ``small entities'' 
includes the definition of ``small businesses'' pursuant to section 3 
of the Small Business Act of 1953, as amended: ``A small business 
concern . . . shall be deemed to be one which is independently owned 
and operated, and which is not dominant in its field of operation.'' 
The definition of ``small business'' varies from industry to industry 
(as specified by NAICS code and found at 13 CFR 121.201) to reflect the 
typical company size in each industry.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \218\ 5 U.S.C. 601 et seq.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    NAICS code 518210, ``Computing Infrastructure Providers, Data 
Processing, Web Hosting, and Related Services,'' contains all the 
affected data brokers as well as some of the other entities engaged in 
one or more of the classes of restricted data transactions.\219\ The 
Department estimated the likely number of small entities affected by 
the rule using the Small Business Administration (``SBA'') small 
business size standards, which themselves are based on the NAICS codes. 
According to the SBA Office of Size Standards, a small business under 
NAICS code 518210 has an annual revenue under $40 million.\220\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \219\ 518210--Computing Infrastructure Providers, Data 
Processing, Web Hosting, and Related Services, North American 
Industry Classification System, https://www.naics.com/naics-code-description/?v=2022&code=518210 [https://perma.cc/5PWG-AQWL].
    \220\ Id.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    Under the appropriate NAICS code, data brokers are considered a 
subset of the total firms; however, for this analysis, it was assumed 
that the proportion of small entities was the same for both the broader 
NAICS industry and the specific data broker industry. Because more than 
90 percent of impacted firms across all relevant industries can be 
considered small entities, the rule impacts a substantial number of 
small entities.

       Table V-1--Small Business Size Standard and Affected Firms
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   Share of affected
    Number of affected firms        firms that are    Number of affected
                                         small            small firms
------------------------------------------------------------------------
4,500...........................  Approximately 90    Approximately
                                   percent.            4,050.
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    This analysis assumes that the small entities affected by the rule 
will incur compliance costs of around $32,380 per firm per year, 
compared with an annual compliance cost of $400,460 for the largest 
affected firms. The costs as a percentage of annual revenue will vary 
company by company.
    The Department is not aware of recent reliable revenue data by firm 
size for the data broker industry, but a reasonable assumption is that 
if a firm's revenues from data sales are not sufficient to cover the 
compliance costs, then that firm will have an incentive to exit that 
market. Furthermore, calculating the proportion of the costs associated 
with the rule that falls on small firms is complicated by the fact that 
several of the rule's provisions--specifically the requirements related 
to cybersecurity, due diligence, recordkeeping, and reporting--likely 
involve high fixed costs. Even if small entities have less complex 
business operations, leading to fewer complications related to 
compliance, they will still face a higher cost burden, proportionally, 
from the rule than larger firms. Large entities will likely already 
have a greater portion of the fixed costs associated with the rule 
covered by existing capabilities. Therefore, while the costs associated 
with the security and due diligence requirements will be smaller in 
absolute terms for smaller entities, such entities will likely need to 
pay a higher proportion of their overall budgets to comply. Due to the 
unknowns and the large number of small entities, it is possible that a 
substantial number of small firms will experience a significant impact.
3. Description of the Projected Reporting, Recordkeeping, and Other 
Compliance Requirements of the Rule
    The rule requires firms engaged in restricted transactions to 
adhere to certain standards for data security, due diligence, 
recordkeeping, and reporting. See Sec.  202.1101. To mitigate the risk 
of sharing government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data 
with countries of concern or covered persons through restricted 
transactions, organizations engaged in restricted transactions would be 
required to institute organizational and system-level data security 
policies, practices, and requirements and data-level requirements 
developed by DHS through CISA in coordination with the Department. See 
Sec.  202.248. Those requirements, which CISA is releasing and 
announcing through a Federal Register notice issued concurrently with 
the final rule, overlap with several similar, widely used cybersecurity 
standards or frameworks. In addition, the security requirements 
developed by CISA require firms to protect the data associated with 
restricted transactions using combinations of the following 
capabilities necessary to prevent access to covered data by covered 
persons or countries of concern:
    1. data minimization and data masking;
    2. encryption;
    3. privacy-enhancing technologies; and
    4. denial of access.
    Firms will also be required to undergo annual independent testing 
and auditing to ensure their continuing compliance with the security 
requirements. As stated in part IV.I.2 of this preamble, the Department 
intends to provide additional guidance on the requirements for a 
sufficiently independent audit after the final rule is published.
    Additionally, to ensure that government-related data and bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data are not accessible by countries of concern or 
covered persons, the rule requires firms to engage in due diligence 
before pursuing restricted transactions, such as by using KYC/Know-
Your-Vendor programs to complete background checks on potential 
partners. Furthermore, as described in Sec.  202.1002 the rule requires 
firms to keep records that contain extensive details of their 
restricted transactions as well as the details of the other parties 
involved. They are also required to undergo

[[Page 1705]]

annual audits of their records to ensure compliance and assess 
potential risks.
4. Identification of All Relevant Federal Rules That May Duplicate, 
Overlap, or Conflict With the Rule
    As discussed in part IV.L of the preamble, while PADFAA seeks to 
address some of the same national security risks as the rule does, 
there are clear differences between PADFAA, the Order, and this rule, 
including the scope of regulated data-brokerage activities, the types 
of bulk sensitive personal data that are covered, and the relevant 
countries of concern. Further, while PADFAA allows the FTC to 
investigate certain data-brokerage activities involving countries of 
concern as unfair trade practices, consistent with the FTC's existing 
jurisdiction, this rule establishes a new set of consistent regulatory 
requirements that apply across multiple types of commercial 
transactions and sectors. Finally, as stated in part IV.L of this 
preamble, the Department will coordinate closely with the FTC to ensure 
consistency in how both authorities are implemented.
    Some restricted transactions under the rule could also end up being 
subject to review and action by CFIUS. In 2018, the Foreign Investment 
Risk Review Modernization Act of 2018 gave CFIUS the authority to 
review certain non-controlling foreign investments that may pose a risk 
to national security by allowing the sensitive personal data of U.S. 
citizens to be exploited.\221\
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    \221\ See Public Law 115-232, tit. XVII, secs. 1701-28, 132 
Stat. 1636, 2173.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    However, while CFIUS acts on a transaction-by-transaction basis, 
this final rule creates restrictions and prohibitions on covered data 
transactions that apply to categories of data transactions involving 
the six countries of concern. In a situation where a covered data 
transaction otherwise subject to the rule is later subject to a CFIUS 
review, such transaction would be exempted from the Department's review 
under the rule to the extent that CFIUS takes any of the actions 
identified in the rule. See Sec. Sec.  202.207 and 202.508.
    Furthermore, the categories of covered data transactions covered by 
the rule extend beyond the scope of CFIUS, including, for example, the 
categories addressing the provision of government-related data or bulk 
U.S. sensitive personal data through data brokerage, vendor agreements, 
and employment agreements. The rule also covers investment agreements 
that may not be covered by CFIUS, as well as cases where the relevant 
risks do not result from the covered transaction or may occur before a 
CFIUS action takes place.
    A description of the alternatives considered, the need for, and 
objectives of, the rule is included in section I.I. of the FRIA 
accompanying this rule, and is not repeated here.

C. Executive Order 13132 (Federalism)

    The rule does not have federalism implications warranting the 
application of Executive Order 13132. The rule does not have 
substantial direct effects on the States, on the relationship between 
the national government and the States, or on the distribution of power 
and responsibilities among the various levels of government.

D. Executive Order 13175 (Consultation and Coordination With Indian 
Tribal Governments)

    The rule does not have Tribal implications warranting the 
application of Executive Order 13175. It does not have substantial 
direct effects on one or more Indian Tribes, on the relationship 
between the Federal Government and Indian Tribes, or on the 
distribution of power and responsibilities between the Federal 
Government and Indian Tribes.

E. Executive Order 12988 (Civil Justice Reform)

    This rule meets the applicable standards set forth in sections 3(a) 
and 3(b)(2) of Executive Order 12988.

F. Paperwork Reduction Act

    The collections of information contained in this rule have been 
approved by OMB in accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, 
44 U.S.C. 3507, under control number 1124-0007.
    The rule includes seven new collections of information, annual 
reports, applications for specific licenses, reports on rejected 
prohibited transactions, requests for advisory opinions, petitions for 
removal from the designated Covered Persons List, reports of known or 
suspected violations of the onward transfers prohibition, and 
recordkeeping requirements for restricted transactions. The Department 
did not receive any comments specifically on these collections of 
information or the estimated burden.
    Based on wage rates from the Bureau of Labor Statistics and lower- 
and upper-bound estimates (used because this is a new program and there 
is uncertainty in the estimated number of potential respondents for 
each of the forms), the following are the estimated burdens of the 
collections:
     Annual reports. The Department estimates that 375 to 750 
filers will send an average of one annual report per year, spending an 
estimated average of 40 hours to prepare and submit each annual report. 
The Department estimates the aggregated costs for all filers at 
$821,100 to $1,642,200 annually for annual reports.
     Applications for specific licenses. The Department 
estimates that 15 to 25 filers will send an average of one application 
for a specific license per year, spending an estimated average of 10 
hours to prepare and submit each application for a specific license. 
The Department estimates the aggregated costs for all filers at $8,211 
to $13,685 annually for applications for specific licenses.
     Reports on rejected prohibited transactions. The 
Department estimates that 15 to 25 filers will send an average of one 
report on a rejected prohibited transaction per year, spending an 
estimated average of two hours to prepare and submit each application 
for a specific license. The Department estimates the aggregated costs 
for all filers at $1,642 to $2,737 annually for reports on rejected 
prohibited transactions.
     Requests for advisory opinions. The Department estimates 
that 50 to 100 filers will send an average of one request for an 
advisory opinion per year, spending an estimated average of two hours 
to prepare and submit each request for an advisory opinion. The 
Department estimates the aggregated costs for all filers at $5,474 to 
$10,948 annually for requests for advisory opinions.
     Petitions for removal from covered persons list. The 
Department estimates that 15 to 25 filers will send an average of one 
petition for removal from the Covered Persons List per year, spending 
an estimated average of five hours to prepare and submit each petition 
for removal from the Covered Persons List. The Department estimates the 
aggregated costs for all filers at $4,106 to $6,843 annually for 
petitions for removal from the Covered Persons List.
     Reports of known or suspected violations of onward 
transfers prohibition. The Department estimates that 300 to 450 filers 
will send an average of one report of known or suspected violations of 
the onward transfers prohibition per year, spending an estimated 
average of two hours to prepare and submit each report of known or 
suspected violations of the onward transfers prohibition. The 
Department estimates the aggregated costs for all filers at $32,844 to 
$49,266 annually for reports of known or suspected violations of the 
onward transfers prohibition.

[[Page 1706]]

     Recordkeeping requirements for restricted transactions. 
The Department estimates that 1,400 small to medium-sized firms will 
incur a total of $1,344,000 in recordkeeping costs per year. Also, the 
Department estimates that 100 large firms will incur a total of 
$22,500,000 in recordkeeping costs per year.
    Under the Paperwork Reduction Act, an agency may not conduct or 
sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, a collection of 
information unless it displays a valid control number assigned by OMB.

G. Unfunded Mandates Reform Act

    The Unfunded Mandates Reform Act requires that Federal agencies 
prepare a written statement assessing the effects of any Federal 
mandate in a proposed or final agency rule that may directly result in 
the expenditure of $100 million or more in 1995 dollars (adjusted 
annually for inflation) in any one year by State, local, and Tribal 
governments, in the aggregate, or by the private sector (2 U.S.C. 
1532(a)). However, the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act does not apply to 
``any provision'' in a proposed or final rule that is ``necessary for 
the national security'' (2 U.S.C. 1503(5)).
    In the Order, the President explained that ``[t]he continuing 
effort of certain countries of concern to access Americans' sensitive 
personal data and United States Government-related data constitutes an 
unusual and extraordinary threat, which has its source in whole or 
substantial part outside the United States, to the national security 
and foreign policy of the United States.'' The Order expanded the scope 
of the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13873 of May 15, 
2019 (Securing the Information and Communications Technology and 
Services Supply Chain), and further addressed with additional measures 
in Executive Order 14034 of June 9, 2021 (Protecting Americans' 
Sensitive Data From Foreign Adversaries). Section 2(a) of the Order 
thus requires the Attorney General to issue the regulations in this 
part, subject to public notice and comment, ``[t]o assist in addressing 
the national security emergency described'' in the Order. Because the 
entirety of this rule and every provision in it addresses the national 
emergency described by the President in the Order, the Department has 
concluded that the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act does not apply to this 
rule.

H. Congressional Review Act

    Pursuant to Subtitle E of the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement 
Fairness Act of 1996 (also known as the Congressional Review Act), the 
Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs has determined that this 
rule meets the criteria set forth in 5 U.S.C. 804(2). As laid out in 
the FRIA, this rule is expected to result in an annual effect on the 
economy of $100 million or more. The Department will submit the final 
rule to Congress and the U.S. Government Accountability Office 
consistent with the Congressional Review Act's requirements no later 
than its effective date.

I. Administrative Pay-As-You-Go Act of 2023

    The Department has determined that the Administrative Pay-As-You-Go 
Act of 2023 (Pub. L. 118-5, div. B, title III, 137 Stat. 31 (2023)) 
does not apply to this rule because it does not affect direct spending.

List of Subjects in 28 CFR Part 202

    Incorporation by reference, Military personnel, National security, 
Personally identifiable information, Privacy, Reporting and 
recordkeeping requirements, Security measures.


0
Under the rulemaking authority vested in the Attorney General in 5 
U.S.C. 301; 28 U.S.C. 509, 510 and delegated to the Assistant Attorney 
General for National Security by A.G. Order No. 6067-2024, and for the 
reasons set forth in the preamble, the Department of Justice adds part 
202 to 28 CFR chapter I to read as follows:

PART 202--ACCESS TO U.S. SENSITIVE PERSONAL DATA AND GOVERNMENT-
RELATED DATA BY COUNTRIES OF CONCERN OR COVERED PERSONS

Sec.
Subpart A--General
202.101 Scope.
202.102 Rules of construction and interpretation.
202.103 Relation of this part to other laws and regulations.
202.104 Delegation of authorities.
202.105 Amendment, modification, or revocation.
202.106 Severability.
Subpart B--Definitions
202.201 Access.
202.202 Attorney General.
202.203 Assistant Attorney General.
202.204 Biometric identifiers.
202.205 Bulk.
202.206 Bulk U.S. sensitive personal data.
202.207 CFIUS action.
202.208 China.
202.209 Country of concern.
202.210 Covered data transaction.
202.211 Covered person.
202.212 Covered personal identifiers.
202.213 Cuba.
202.214 Data brokerage.
202.215 Directing.
202.216 Effective date.
202.217 Employment agreement.
202.218 Entity.
202.219 Exempt transaction.
202.220 Former senior official.
202.221 Foreign person.
202.222 Government-related data.
202.223 Human biospecimens.
202.224 Human `omic data.
202.225 IEEPA.
202.226 Information or informational materials.
202.227 Interest.
202.228 Investment agreement.
202.229 Iran.
202.230 Knowingly.
202.231 Licenses; general and specific.
202.232 Linked.
202.233 Linkable.
202.234 Listed identifier.
202.235 National Security Division.
202.236 North Korea.
202.237 Order.
202.238 Person.
202.239 Personal communications.
202.240 Personal financial data.
202.241 Personal health data.
202.242 Precise geolocation data.
202.243 Prohibited transaction.
202.244 Property; property interest.
202.245 Recent former employees or contractors.
202.246 Restricted transaction.
202.247 Russia.
202.248 Security requirements.
202.249 Sensitive personal data.
202.250 Special Administrative Region of Hong Kong.
202.251 Special Administrative Region of Macau.
202.252 Telecommunications service.
202.253 Transaction.
202.254 Transfer.
202.255 United States.
202.256 United States person or U.S. person.
202.257 U.S. device.
202.258 Vendor agreement.
202.259 Venezuela.
Subpart C--Prohibited Transactions and Related Activities
202.301 Prohibited data-brokerage transactions.
202.302 Other prohibited data-brokerage transactions involving 
potential onward transfer to countries of concern or covered 
persons.
202.303 Prohibited human `omic data and human biospecimen 
transactions.
202.304 Prohibited evasions, attempts, causing violations, and 
conspiracies.
202.305 Knowingly directing prohibited or restricted transactions.
Subpart D--Restricted Transactions
202.401 Authorization to conduct restricted transactions.
202.402 [Reserved]
Subpart E--Exempt Transactions
202.501 Personal communications.
202.502 Information or informational materials.
202.503 Travel.

[[Page 1707]]

202.504 Official business of the United States Government.
202.505 Financial services.
202.506 Corporate group transactions.
202.507 Transactions required or authorized by Federal law or 
international agreements, or necessary for compliance with Federal 
law.
202.508 Investment agreements subject to a CFIUS action.
202.509 Telecommunications services.
202.510 Drug, biological product, and medical device authorizations.
202.511 Other clinical investigations and post-marketing 
surveillance data.
Subpart F--Determination of Countries of Concern
202.601 Determination of countries of concern.
Subpart G--Covered Persons
202.701 Designation of covered persons.
202.702 Procedures governing removal from the Covered Persons List.
Subpart H--Licensing
202.801 General licenses.
202.802 Specific licenses.
202.803 General provisions.
Subpart I--Advisory Opinions
202.901 Inquiries concerning application of this part.
Subpart J--Due Diligence and Audit Requirements
202.1001 Due diligence for restricted transactions.
202.1002 Audits for restricted transactions.
Subpart K--Reporting and Recordkeeping Requirements
202.1101 Records and recordkeeping requirements.
202.1102 Reports to be furnished on demand.
202.1103 Annual reports.
202.1104 Reports on rejected prohibited transactions.
Subpart L--Submitting Applications, Requests, Reports, and Responses
202.1201 Procedures.
Subpart M--Penalties and Finding of Violation
202.1301 Penalties for violations.
202.1302 Process for pre-penalty notice.
202.1303 Penalty imposition.
202.1304 Administrative collection and litigation.
202.1305 Finding of violation.
202.1306 Opportunity to respond to a pre-penalty notie or finding of 
violation.
Subpart N--Government-Related Location Data List
202.1401 Government-Related Location Data List.

    Authority:  50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.; 50 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.; E.O. 
14117, 89 FR 15421.

Subpart A--General


Sec.  202.101  Scope.

    (a) Executive Order 14117 of February 28, 2024 (Preventing Access 
to Americans' Bulk Sensitive Personal Data and United States 
Government-Related Data by Countries of Concern) (``the Order''), 
directs the Attorney General to issue regulations that prohibit or 
otherwise restrict United States persons from engaging in any 
acquisition, holding, use, transfer, transportation, or exportation of, 
or dealing in, any property in which a foreign country or national 
thereof has any interest (``transaction''), where the transaction: 
involves United States Government-related data (``government-related 
data'') or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data, as defined by final rules 
implementing the Order; falls within a class of transactions that has 
been determined by the Attorney General to pose an unacceptable risk to 
the national security of the United States because the transactions may 
enable access by countries of concern or covered persons to government-
related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data; and meets other 
criteria specified by the Order.
    (b) This part contains regulations implementing the Order and 
addressing the national emergency declared in Executive Order 13873 of 
May 15, 2019 (Securing the Information and Communications Technology 
and Services Supply Chain), and further addressed with additional 
measures in Executive Order 14034 of June 9, 2021 (Protecting 
Americans' Sensitive Data from Foreign Adversaries) and Executive Order 
14117.


Sec.  202.102  Rules of construction and interpretation.

    (a) The examples included in this part are provided for 
informational purposes and should not be construed to alter the meaning 
of the text of the regulations in this part.
    (b) As used in this part, the term ``including'' means ``including 
but not limited to.''
    (c) All references to ``days'' in this part mean calendar days. In 
computing any time period specified in this part:
    (1) Exclude the day of the event that triggers the period;
    (2) Count every day, including Saturdays, Sundays, and legal 
holidays; and
    (3) Include the last day of the period, but if the last day is a 
Saturday, Sunday, or Federal holiday, the period continues to run until 
the end of the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or Federal 
holiday.


Sec.  202.103  Relation of this part to other laws and regulations.

    Nothing in this part shall be construed as altering or affecting 
any other authority, process, regulation, investigation, enforcement 
measure, or review provided by or established under any other provision 
of Federal law, including the International Emergency Economic Powers 
Act.


Sec.  202.104  Delegation of authorities.

    Any action that the Attorney General is authorized to take pursuant 
to the Order or pursuant to this part may be taken by the Assistant 
Attorney General for National Security or by any other person to whom 
the Attorney General or Assistant Attorney General for National 
Security in writing delegates authority so to act.


Sec.  202.105  Amendment, modification, or revocation.

    Except as otherwise provided by law, any determinations, 
prohibitions, decisions, licenses (whether general or specific), 
guidance, authorizations, instructions, orders, or forms issued 
pursuant to this part may be amended, modified, or revoked, in whole or 
in part, at any time.


Sec.  202.106  Severability.

    If any provision of this part is held to be invalid or 
unenforceable by its terms, or as applied to any person or 
circumstance, or stayed pending further agency action or judicial 
review, the provision is to be construed so as to continue to give the 
maximum effect to the provision permitted by law, unless such holding 
will be one of utter invalidity or unenforceability, in which event the 
provision will be severable from this part and will not affect the 
remainder thereof.

Subpart B--Definitions


Sec.  202.201  Access.

    The term access means logical or physical access, including the 
ability to obtain, read, copy, decrypt, edit, divert, release, affect, 
alter the state of, or otherwise view or receive, in any form, 
including through information systems, information technology systems, 
cloud-computing platforms, networks, security systems, equipment, or 
software. For purposes of determining whether a transaction is a 
covered data transaction, access is determined without regard for the 
application or effect of any security requirements.


Sec.  202.202  Attorney General.

    The term Attorney General means the Attorney General of the United 
States or the Attorney General's designee.

[[Page 1708]]

Sec.  202.203  Assistant Attorney General.

    The term Assistant Attorney General means the Assistant Attorney 
General, National Security Division, United States Department of 
Justice, or the Assistant Attorney General's designee.


Sec.  202.204  Biometric identifiers.

    The term biometric identifiers means measurable physical 
characteristics or behaviors used to recognize or verify the identity 
of an individual, including facial images, voice prints and patterns, 
retina and iris scans, palm prints and fingerprints, gait, and keyboard 
usage patterns that are enrolled in a biometric system and the 
templates created by the system.


Sec.  202.205  Bulk.

    The term bulk means any amount of sensitive personal data that 
meets or exceeds the following thresholds at any point in the preceding 
12 months, whether through a single covered data transaction or 
aggregated across covered data transactions involving the same U.S. 
person and the same foreign person or covered person:
    (a) Human `omic data collected about or maintained on more than 
1,000 U.S. persons, or, in the case of human genomic data, more than 
100 U.S. persons;
    (b) Biometric identifiers collected about or maintained on more 
than 1,000 U.S. persons;
    (c) Precise geolocation data collected about or maintained on more 
than 1,000 U.S. devices;
    (d) Personal health data collected about or maintained on more than 
10,000 U.S. persons;
    (e) Personal financial data collected about or maintained on more 
than 10,000 U.S. persons;
    (f) Covered personal identifiers collected about or maintained on 
more than 100,000 U.S. persons; or
    (g) Combined data, meaning any collection or set of data that 
contains more than one of the categories in paragraphs (a) through (f) 
of this section, or that contains any listed identifier linked to 
categories in paragraphs (a) through (e) of this section, where any 
individual data type meets the threshold number of persons or devices 
collected or maintained in the aggregate for the lowest number of U.S. 
persons or U.S. devices in that category of data.


Sec.  202.206  Bulk U.S. sensitive personal data.

    The term bulk U.S. sensitive personal data means a collection or 
set of sensitive personal data relating to U.S. persons, in any format, 
regardless of whether the data is anonymized, pseudonymized, de-
identified, or encrypted, where such data meets or exceeds the 
applicable threshold set forth in Sec.  202.205.


Sec.  202.207  CFIUS action.

    The term CFIUS action means any agreement or condition the 
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States has entered into 
or imposed pursuant to 50 U.S.C. 4565(l)(1), (3), or (5) to resolve a 
national security risk involving access by a country of concern or 
covered person to sensitive personal data that the Committee on Foreign 
Investment in the United States has explicitly designated, in the 
agreement or document containing the condition, as a CFIUS action, 
including:
    (a) Suspension of a proposed or pending transaction, as authorized 
under 50 U.S.C. 4565(l)(1);
    (b) Entry into or imposition of any agreement or condition with any 
party to a covered transaction, as authorized under 50 U.S.C. 
4565(l)(3); and
    (c) The establishment of interim protections for covered 
transactions withdrawn before CFIUS's review or investigation is 
completed, as authorized under 50 U.S.C. 4565(l)(5).


Sec.  202.208  China.

    The term China means the People's Republic of China, including the 
Special Administrative Region of Hong Kong and the Special 
Administrative Region of Macau, as well as any political subdivision, 
agency, or instrumentality thereof.


Sec.  202.209  Country of concern.

    The term country of concern means any foreign government that, as 
determined by the Attorney General with the concurrence of the 
Secretary of State and the Secretary of Commerce:
    (a) Has engaged in a long-term pattern or serious instances of 
conduct significantly adverse to the national security of the United 
States or security and safety of United States persons; and
    (b) Poses a significant risk of exploiting government-related data 
or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data to the detriment of the national 
security of the United States or security and safety of U.S. persons.


Sec.  202.210  Covered data transaction.

    (a) Definition. A covered data transaction is any transaction that 
involves any access by a country of concern or covered person to any 
government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data and that 
involves:
    (1) Data brokerage;
    (2) A vendor agreement;
    (3) An employment agreement; or
    (4) An investment agreement.
    (b) Examples--(1) Example 1. A U.S. institution conducts medical 
research at its own laboratory in a country of concern, including 
sending several U.S.-citizen employees to that laboratory to perform 
and assist with the research. The U.S. institution does not engage in 
data brokerage or a vendor, employment, or investment agreement that 
gives a covered person or country of concern access to government-
related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. Because the U.S. 
institution does not engage in any data brokerage or enter into a 
vendor, employment, or investment agreement, the U.S. institution's 
research activity is not a covered data transaction.
    (2) Example 2. A U.S. person engages in a vendor agreement with a 
covered person involving access to bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. 
The vendor agreement is a restricted transaction. To comply with the 
CISA security requirements, the U.S. person, among other things, uses 
data-level requirements to mitigate the risk that the covered person 
could access the data. The vendor agreement remains a covered data 
transaction subject to the requirements of this part.
    (3) Example 3. A covered person engages in a vendor agreement with 
a U.S. person involving the U.S. person accessing bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data already possessed by the covered person. The vendor 
agreement is not a covered data transaction because the transaction 
does not involve access by the covered person.


Sec.  202.211  Covered person.

    (a) Definition. The term covered person means:
    (1) A foreign person that is an entity that is 50% or more owned, 
directly or indirectly, individually or in the aggregate, by one or 
more countries of concern or persons described in paragraph (a)(2) of 
this section; or that is organized or chartered under the laws of, or 
has its principal place of business in, a country of concern;
    (2) A foreign person that is an entity that is 50% or more owned, 
directly or indirectly, individually or in the aggregate, by one or 
more persons described in paragraphs (a)(1), (3), (4), or (5) of this 
section;
    (3) A foreign person that is an individual who is an employee or 
contractor of a country of concern or of an entity described in 
paragraphs (a)(1), (2), or (5) of this section;
    (4) A foreign person that is an individual who is primarily a 
resident

[[Page 1709]]

in the territorial jurisdiction of a country of concern; or
    (5) Any person, wherever located, determined by the Attorney 
General:
    (i) To be, to have been, or to be likely to become owned or 
controlled by or subject to the jurisdiction or direction of a country 
of concern or covered person;
    (ii) To act, to have acted or purported to act, or to be likely to 
act for or on behalf of a country of concern or covered person; or
    (iii) To have knowingly caused or directed, or to be likely to 
knowingly cause or direct a violation of this part.
    (b) Examples--(1) Example 1. Foreign persons primarily resident in 
Cuba, Iran, or another country of concern would be covered persons.
    (2) Example 2. Chinese or Russian citizens located in the United 
States would be treated as U.S. persons and would not be covered 
persons (except to the extent individually designated). They would be 
subject to the same prohibitions and restrictions as all other U.S. 
persons with respect to engaging in covered data transactions with 
countries of concern or covered persons.
    (3) Example 3. Citizens of a country of concern who are primarily 
resident in a third country, such as Russian citizens primarily 
resident in a European Union country or Cuban citizens primarily 
resident in a South American country that is not a country of concern, 
would not be covered persons except to the extent they are individually 
designated or to the extent that they are employees or contractors of a 
country of concern government or a covered person that is an entity.
    (4) Example 4. A foreign person is located abroad and is employed 
by a company headquartered in China. Because the company is a covered 
person that is an entity and the employee is located outside the United 
States, the employee is a covered person.
    (5) Example 5. A foreign person is located abroad and is employed 
by a company that has been designated as a covered person. Because the 
foreign person is the employee of a covered person that is an entity 
and the employee is a foreign person, the person is a covered person.
    (6) Example 6. A foreign person individual investor who principally 
resides in Venezuela owns 50% of a technology company that is solely 
organized under the laws of the United States. The investor is a 
covered person because the investor is a foreign person that is an 
individual who is primarily a resident in the territorial jurisdiction 
of a country of concern. The technology company is a U.S. person 
because it is an entity organized solely under the laws of the United 
States or any jurisdiction within the United States. The technology 
company is not a covered person because it is not a foreign person and 
therefore does not meet the criteria of Sec.  202.211(a)(2). However, 
the technology company could still be designated as a covered person 
following a determination that the technology company meets one or more 
criteria of Sec.  202.211(a)(5).
    (7) Example 7. Same as Example 6, but the technology company is 
additionally organized under the laws of Luxembourg. A U.S. company 
wishes to license bulk U.S. sensitive personal data to the technology 
company. The technology company is not a U.S. person because it is not 
solely organized under the laws of the United States. The technology 
company is a covered person because it is 50% or more owned, directly 
or indirectly, individually or in the aggregate, by a foreign person 
that is an individual who is primarily resident in the territorial 
jurisdiction of a country of concern. The transaction between the U.S. 
company and the technology company would be a prohibited data 
transaction.
    (8) Example 8. A foreign person that lives in China owns 50% of 
Foreign Entity A. Foreign Entity A owns 100% of Foreign Entity B and 
100% of Foreign Entity C. Foreign Entity B owns 20% of Foreign Entity 
D. Foreign Entity C owns 30% of Foreign Entity D. Foreign Entity D 
would be a covered person for two independent reasons. First, Foreign 
Entity D because it is ``indirectly'' 50% or more owned by Foreign 
Entity A (20% through Foreign Entity B and 30% through Foreign Entity 
C). Second, Foreign Entity D is directly 50% owned, in the aggregate, 
by Foreign Entity B and Foreign Entity C, each of which are covered 
persons because they are 50% or more owned by Foreign Entity A.


Sec.  202.212  Covered personal identifiers.

    (a) Definition. The term covered personal identifiers means any 
listed identifier:
    (1) In combination with any other listed identifier; or
    (2) In combination with other data that is disclosed by a 
transacting party pursuant to the transaction such that the listed 
identifier is linked or linkable to other listed identifiers or to 
other sensitive personal data.
    (b) Exclusion. The term covered personal identifiers excludes:
    (1) Demographic or contact data that is linked only to other 
demographic or contact data (such as first and last name, birthplace, 
ZIP code, residential street or postal address, phone number, and email 
address and similar public account identifiers); and
    (2) A network-based identifier, account-authentication data, or 
call-detail data that is linked only to other network-based identifier, 
account-authentication data, or call-detail data as necessary for the 
provision of telecommunications, networking, or similar service.
    (c) Examples of listed identifiers in combination with other listed 
identifiers--(1) Example 1. A standalone listed identifier in isolation 
(i.e., that is not linked to another listed identifier, sensitive 
personal data, or other data that is disclosed by a transacting party 
pursuant to the transaction such that the listed identifier is linked 
or linkable to other listed identifiers or to other sensitive personal 
data)--such as a Social Security Number or account username--would not 
constitute a covered personal identifier.
    (2) Example 2. A listed identifier linked to another listed 
identifier--such as a first and last name linked to a Social Security 
number, a driver's license number linked to a passport number, a device 
Media Access Control (``MAC'') address linked to a residential address, 
an account username linked to a first and last name, or a mobile 
advertising ID linked to an email address--would constitute covered 
personal identifiers.
    (3) Example 3. Demographic or contact data linked only to other 
demographic or contact data--such as a first and last name linked to a 
residential street address, an email address linked to a first and last 
name, or a customer loyalty membership record linking a first and last 
name to a phone number--would not constitute covered personal 
identifiers.
    (4) Example 4. Demographic or contact data linked to other 
demographic or contact data and to another listed identifier--such as a 
first and last name linked to an email address and to an IP address--
would constitute covered personal identifiers.
    (5) Example 5. Account usernames linked to passwords as part of a 
sale of a dataset would constitute covered personal identifiers. Those 
pieces of account-authentication data are not linked as a necessary 
part of the provision of telecommunications, networking, or similar 
services. This combination would constitute covered personal 
identifiers.
    (d) Examples of a listed identifier in combination with other data 
disclosed by a transacting party--(1) Example 1. A foreign person who 
is a covered person asks a U.S. company for a list of Media Access 
Control (``MAC'')

[[Page 1710]]

addresses from devices that have connected to the wireless network of a 
U.S. fast-food restaurant located in a particular government building. 
The U.S. company then sells the list of MAC addresses, without any 
other listed identifiers or sensitive personal data, to the covered 
person. The disclosed MAC addresses, when paired with the other data 
disclosed by the covered person--that the devices ``have connected to 
the wireless network of a U.S. fast-food restaurant located in a 
particular government building''--makes it so that the MAC addresses 
are linked or linkable to other sensitive personal data, in this case 
precise geolocation data of the location of the fast-food restaurant 
that the national security-related individuals frequent with their 
devices. This combination of data therefore meets the definition of 
covered personal identifiers.
    (2) Example 2. A U.S. company sells to a country of concern a list 
of residential addresses that the company describes (whether in a 
heading on the list or separately to the country of concern as part of 
the transaction) as ``addresses of members of a country of concern's 
opposition political party in New York City'' or as ``addresses of 
active-duty military officers who live in Howard County, Maryland'' 
without any other listed identifiers or sensitive personal data. The 
data disclosed by the U.S. company's description, when paired with the 
disclosed addresses, makes the addresses linked or linkable to other 
listed identifiers or to other sensitive personal data of the U.S. 
individuals associated with them. This combination of data therefore 
meets the definition of covered personal identifiers.
    (3) Example 3. A covered person asks a U.S. company for a bulk list 
of birth dates for ``any American who visited a Starbucks in 
Washington, DC, in December 2023.'' The U.S. company then sells the 
list of birth dates, without any other listed identifiers or sensitive 
personal data, to the covered person. The other data disclosed by the 
covered person--``any American who visited a Starbucks in Washington, 
DC, in December 2023''--does not make the birth dates linked or 
linkable to other listed identifiers or to other sensitive personal 
data. This combination of data therefore does not meet the definition 
of covered personal identifiers.
    (4) Example 4. Same as Example 3, but the covered person asks the 
U.S. company for a bulk list of names (rather than birth dates) for 
``any American who visited a Starbucks in Washington, DC in December 
2023.'' The other data disclosed by the covered person--``any American 
who visited a Starbucks in Washington, DC, in December 2023''--does not 
make the list of names, without more, linked or linkable to other 
listed identifiers or to other sensitive personal data. This 
combination of data therefore does not meet the definition of covered 
personal identifiers.
    (5) Example 5. A U.S. company sells to a covered person a list of 
residential addresses that the company describes (in a heading in the 
list or to the covered person as part of the transaction) as 
``households of Americans who watched more than 50% of episodes'' of a 
specific popular TV show, without any other listed identifiers or 
sensitive personal data. The other data disclosed by the U.S. company--
``Americans who watched more than 50% of episodes'' of a specific 
popular TV show--does not increase the extent to which the addresses 
are linked or linkable to other listed identifiers or to other 
sensitive personal data. This combination of data therefore does not 
meet the definition of covered personal identifiers.


Sec.  202.213  Cuba.

    The term Cuba means the Republic of Cuba, as well as any political 
subdivision, agency, or instrumentality thereof.


Sec.  202.214  Data brokerage.

    (a) Definition. The term data brokerage means the sale of data, 
licensing of access to data, or similar commercial transactions, 
excluding an employment agreement, investment agreement, or a vendor 
agreement, involving the transfer of data from any person (the 
provider) to any other person (the recipient), where the recipient did 
not collect or process the data directly from the individuals linked or 
linkable to the collected or processed data.
    (b) Examples--(1) Example 1. A U.S. company sells bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data to an entity headquartered in a country of 
concern. The U.S. company engages in prohibited data brokerage.
    (2) Example 2. A U.S. company enters into an agreement that gives a 
covered person a license to access government-related data held by the 
U.S. company. The U.S. company engages in prohibited data brokerage.
    (3) Example 3. A U.S. organization maintains a database of bulk 
U.S. sensitive personal data and offers annual memberships for a fee 
that provide members a license to access that data. Providing an annual 
membership to a covered person that includes a license to access 
government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data would 
constitute prohibited data brokerage.
    (4) Example 4. A U.S. company owns and operates a mobile app for 
U.S. users with available advertising space. As part of selling the 
advertising space, the U.S. company provides IP addresses and 
advertising IDs of more than 100,000 U.S. users' devices to an 
advertising exchange based in a country of concern in a twelve-month 
period. The U.S. company's provision of this data as part of the sale 
of advertising space is a covered data transaction involving data 
brokerage and is a prohibited transaction because IP addresses and 
advertising IDs are listed identifiers that satisfy the definition of 
bulk covered personal identifiers in this transaction.
    (5) Example 5. Same as Example 4, but the U.S. company provides the 
data to an advertising exchange based in the United States. As part of 
the sale of the advertising space, the U.S. advertising exchange 
provides the data to advertisers headquartered in a country of concern. 
The U.S. company's provision of the data to the U.S. advertising 
exchange would not be a transaction because it is between U.S. persons. 
The advertising exchange's provision of this data to the country of 
concern-based advertisers is data brokerage because it is a commercial 
transaction involving the transfer of data from the U.S. advertising 
exchange to the advertisers headquartered in the country of concern, 
where those country-of-concern advertisers did not collect or process 
the data directly from the individuals linked or linkable to the 
collected or processed data. Furthermore, the U.S. advertising 
exchange's provision of this data to the country of concern-based 
advertisers is a prohibited transaction.
    (6) Example 6. A U.S. information technology company operates an 
autonomous driving platform that collects the precise geolocation data 
of its cars operating in the United States. The U.S. company sells or 
otherwise licenses this bulk data to its parent company headquartered 
in a country of concern to help develop artificial intelligence 
technology and machine learning capabilities. The sale or license is 
data brokerage and a prohibited transaction.
    (7) Example 7. A U.S. company owns or operates a mobile app or 
website for U.S. users. That mobile app or website contains one or more 
tracking pixels or software development kits that were knowingly 
installed or approved for incorporation into the app or website by the 
U.S. company. The tracking pixels or software development kits transfer 
or otherwise provide access to

[[Page 1711]]

government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data to a 
country of concern or covered person-owned social media app for 
targeted advertising. The U.S. company engages in prohibited data 
brokerage.
    (8) Example 8. A non-U.S. company is contracted to develop a mobile 
app for a U.S. company. In developing the mobile app for that U.S. 
company, the non-U.S. company knowingly incorporates tracking pixels or 
software development kits into the mobile app that then transfer or 
otherwise provide access to government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data to a country of concern or covered person for 
targeted advertising, at the request of the U.S. company. The non-U.S. 
company has caused a violation of the data brokerage prohibition. If 
the U.S. company knowingly arranged the transfer of such data to the 
country of concern or covered person by requesting incorporation of the 
tracking pixels or software development kits, the U.S. company has 
engaged in prohibited data brokerage.
    (9) Example 9. A U.S. researcher shares bulk human `omic data on 
U.S. persons with a researcher in a country of concern (a covered 
person) with whom the U.S. researcher is drafting a paper for 
submission to an academic journal. The two researchers exchange country 
of concern and bulk U.S. human `omic data over a period of several 
months to analyze and describe the findings of their research for the 
journal article. The U.S. person does not provide to or receive from 
the covered person or the covered person's employer any money or other 
valuable consideration as part of the authors' study. The U.S. person 
has not engaged in a covered data transaction involving data brokerage, 
because the transaction does not involve the sale of data, licensing of 
access to data, or similar commercial transaction involving the 
transfer of data to the covered person.
    (10) Example 10. A U.S. researcher receives a grant from a 
university in a country of concern to study. bulk personal health data 
and bulk human `omic data on U.S. persons. The grant directs the 
researcher to share the underlying bulk U.S. sensitive personal data 
with the country of concern university (a covered person). The 
transaction is a covered data transaction because it involves access by 
a covered person to bulk U.S. sensitive personal data and is data 
brokerage because it involves the transfer of bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data to a covered person in return for a financial benefit.


Sec.  202.215  Directing.

    The term directing means having any authority (individually or as 
part of a group) to make decisions for or on behalf of an entity and 
exercising that authority.


Sec.  202.216  Effective date.

    The term effective date refers to the effective date of this part, 
which is 12:01 a.m. ET on April 8, 2025.


Sec.  202.217  Employment agreement.

    (a) Definition. The term employment agreement means any agreement 
or arrangement in which an individual, other than as an independent 
contractor, performs work or performs job functions directly for a 
person in exchange for payment or other consideration, including 
employment on a board or committee, executive-level arrangements or 
services, and employment services at an operational level.
    (b) Examples--(1) Example 1. A U.S. company that conducts consumer 
human genomic testing collects and maintains bulk human genomic data 
from U.S. consumers. The U.S. company has global IT operations, 
including employing a team of individuals who are citizens of and 
primarily resident in a country of concern to provide back-end 
services. The agreements related to employing these individuals are 
employment agreements. Employment as part of the global IT operations 
team includes access to the U.S. company's systems containing the bulk 
human genomic data. These employment agreements would be prohibited 
transactions (because they involve access to bulk human genomic data).
    (2) Example 2. A U.S. company develops its own mobile games and 
social media apps that collect the bulk U.S. sensitive personal data of 
its U.S. users. The U.S. company distributes these games and apps in 
the United States through U.S.-based digital distribution platforms for 
software applications. The U.S. company intends to hire as CEO an 
individual designated by the Attorney General as a covered person 
because of evidence the CEO acts on behalf of a country of concern. The 
agreement retaining the individual as CEO would be an employment 
agreement. The individual's authorities and responsibilities as CEO 
involve access to all data collected by the apps, including the bulk 
U.S. sensitive personal data. The CEO's employment would be a 
restricted transaction.
    (3) Example 3. A U.S. company has derived U.S. persons' biometric 
identifiers by scraping public photos from social media platforms. The 
U.S. company stores the derived biometric identifiers in bulk, 
including face-data scans, for the purpose of training or enhancing 
facial-recognition software. The U.S. company intends to hire a foreign 
person, who primarily resides in a country of concern, as a project 
manager responsible for the database. The agreement retaining the 
project manager would be an employment agreement. The individual's 
employment as the lead project manager would involve access to the bulk 
biometric identifiers. The project manager's employment would be a 
restricted transaction.
    (4) Example 4. A U.S. financial-services company seeks to hire a 
data scientist who is a citizen of a country of concern who primarily 
resides in that country of concern and who is developing a new 
artificial intelligence-based personal assistant that could be sold as 
a standalone product to the company's customers. The arrangement 
retaining the data scientist would be an employment agreement. As part 
of that individual's employment, the data scientist would have 
administrator rights that allow that individual to access, download, 
and transmit bulk quantities of personal financial data not ordinarily 
incident to and part of the company's underlying provision of financial 
services to its customers. The data scientist's employment would be a 
restricted transaction.
    (5) Example 5. A U.S. company sells goods and collects bulk 
personal financial data about its U.S. customers. The U.S. company 
appoints a citizen of a country of concern, who is located in a country 
of concern, to its board of directors. This director would be a covered 
person, and the arrangement appointing the director would be an 
employment agreement. In connection with the board's data security and 
cybersecurity responsibilities, the director could access the bulk 
personal financial data. The director's employment would be a 
restricted transaction.


Sec.  202.218  Entity.

    The term entity means a partnership, association, trust, joint 
venture, corporation, group, subgroup, or other organization.


Sec.  202.219  Exempt transaction.

    The term exempt transaction means a data transaction that is 
subject to one or more exemptions described in subpart E of this part.


Sec.  202.220  Former senior official.

    The term former senior official means either a ``former senior 
employee'' or a

[[Page 1712]]

``former very senior employee,'' as those terms are defined in 5 CFR 
2641.104.


Sec.  202.221  Foreign person.

    The term foreign person means any person that is not a U.S. person.


Sec.  202.222  Government-related data.

    (a) Definition. The term government-related data means the 
following:
    (1) Any precise geolocation data, regardless of volume, for any 
location within any area enumerated on the Government-Related Location 
Data List in Sec.  202.1401 which the Attorney General has determined 
poses a heightened risk of being exploited by a country of concern to 
reveal insights about locations controlled by the Federal Government, 
including insights about facilities, activities, or populations in 
those locations, to the detriment of national security, because of the 
nature of those locations or the personnel who work there. Such 
locations may include:
    (i) The worksite or duty station of Federal Government employees or 
contractors who occupy a national security position as that term is 
defined in 5 CFR 1400.102(a)(4);
    (ii) A military installation as that term is defined in 10 U.S.C. 
2801(c)(4); or
    (iii) Facilities or locations that otherwise support the Federal 
Government's national security, defense, intelligence, law enforcement, 
or foreign policy missions.
    (2) Any sensitive personal data, regardless of volume, that a 
transacting party markets as linked or linkable to current or recent 
former employees or contractors, or former senior officials, of the 
United States Government, including the military and Intelligence 
Community.
    (b) Examples of government-related data marketed by a transacting 
party--(1) Example 1. A U.S. company advertises the sale of a set of 
sensitive personal data as belonging to ``active duty'' personnel, 
``military personnel who like to read,'' ``DoD'' personnel, 
``government employees,'' or ``communities that are heavily connected 
to a nearby military base.'' The data is government-related data.
    (2) Example 2. In discussing the sale of a set of sensitive 
personal data with a covered person, a U.S. company describes the 
dataset as belonging to members of a specific named organization. The 
identified organization restricts membership to current and former 
members of the military and their families. The data is government-
related data.


Sec.  202.223  Human biospecimens.

    (a) The term human biospecimens means a quantity of tissue, blood, 
urine, or other human-derived material, including such material 
classified under any of the following 10-digit Harmonized System-based 
Schedule B numbers:
    (1) 0501.00.0000 Human hair, unworked, whether or not washed or 
scoured; waste of human hair
    (2) 3001.20.0000 Extracts of glands or other organs or of their 
secretions
    (3) 3001.90.0115 Glands and other organs, dried, whether or not 
powdered
    (4) 3002.12.0010 Human blood plasma
    (5) 3002.12.0020 Normal human blood sera, whether or not freeze-
dried
    (6) 3002.12.0030 Human immune blood sera
    (7) 3002.12.0090 Antisera and other blood fractions, Other
    (8) 3002.51.0000 Cell therapy products
    (9) 3002.59.0000 Cell cultures, whether or not modified, Other
    (10) 3002.90.5210 Whole human blood
    (11) 3002.90.5250 Blood, human/animal, other
    (12) 9705.21.0000 Human specimens and parts thereof
    (b) Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this section, the term human 
biospecimens does not include human biospecimens, including human 
blood, cell, and plasma-derived therapeutics, intended by a recipient 
solely for use in diagnosing, treating, or preventing any disease or 
medical condition.


Sec.  202.224  Human `omic data.

    (a) The term human `omic data means:
    (1) Human genomic data. Data representing the nucleic acid 
sequences that constitute the entire set or a subset of the genetic 
instructions found in a human cell, including the result or results of 
an individual's ``genetic test'' (as defined in 42 U.S.C. 300gg-
91(d)(17)) and any related human genetic sequencing data.
    (2) Human epigenomic data. Data derived from a systems-level 
analysis of human epigenetic modifications, which are changes in gene 
expression that do not involve alterations to the DNA sequence itself. 
These epigenetic modifications include modifications such as DNA 
methylation, histone modifications, and non-coding RNA regulation. 
Routine clinical measurements of epigenetic modifications for 
individualized patient care purposes would not be considered epigenomic 
data under this rule because such measurements would not entail a 
systems-level analysis of the epigenetic modifications in a sample.
    (3) Human proteomic data. Data derived from a systems-level 
analysis of proteins expressed by a human genome, cell, tissue, or 
organism. Routine clinical measurements of proteins for individualized 
patient care purposes would not be considered proteomic data under this 
rule because such measurements would not entail a systems-level 
analysis of the proteins found in such a sample.
    (4) Human transcriptomic data. Data derived from a systems-level 
analysis of RNA transcripts produced by the human genome under specific 
conditions or in a specific cell type. Routine clinical measurements of 
RNA transcripts for individualized patient care purposes would not be 
considered transcriptomic data under this rule because such 
measurements would not entail a systems-level analysis of the RNA 
transcripts in a sample.
    (b) The term human `omic data excludes pathogen-specific data 
embedded in human `omic data sets.


Sec.  202.225  IEEPA.

    The term IEEPA means the International Emergency Economic Powers 
Act (50 U.S.C. 1701 et seq.).


Sec.  202.226  Information or informational materials.

    (a) Definition. The term information or informational materials is 
limited to expressive material and includes publications, films, 
posters, phonograph records, photographs, microfilms, microfiche, 
tapes, compact disks, CD ROMs, artworks, and news wire feeds. It does 
not include data that is technical, functional, or otherwise non-
expressive.
    (b) Exclusions. The term information or informational materials 
does not include:
    (1) Information or informational materials not fully created and in 
existence at the date of the data transaction, or the substantive or 
artistic alteration or enhancement of information or informational 
materials, or the provision of marketing and business consulting 
services, including to market, produce or co-produce, or assist in the 
creation of information or informational materials;
    (2) Items that were, as of April 30, 1994, or that thereafter 
become, controlled for export to the extent that such controls promote 
the nonproliferation or antiterrorism policies of the United States, or 
with respect to which acts are prohibited by 18 U.S.C. chapter 37.
    (c) Examples--(1) Example 1. A U.S. person enters into an agreement 
to

[[Page 1713]]

create a customized dataset of bulk U.S. sensitive personal data that 
meets a covered person's specifications (such as the specific types and 
fields of data, date ranges, and other criteria) and to sell that 
dataset to the covered person. This customized dataset is not fully 
created and in existence at the date of the agreement, and therefore is 
not information or informational materials.
    (2) Example 2. A U.S. company has access to several pre-existing 
databases of different bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. The U.S. 
company offers, for a fee, to use data analytics to link the data 
across these databases to the same individuals and to sell that 
combined dataset to a covered person. This service constitutes a 
substantive alteration or enhancement of the data in the pre-existing 
databases and therefore is not information or informational materials.


Sec.  202.227  Interest.

    Except as otherwise provided in this part, the term interest, when 
used with respect to property (e.g., ``an interest in property''), 
means an interest of any nature whatsoever, direct or indirect.


Sec.  202.228  Investment agreement.

    (a) Definition. The term investment agreement means an agreement or 
arrangement in which any person, in exchange for payment or other 
consideration, obtains direct or indirect ownership interests in or 
rights in relation to:
    (1) Real estate located in the United States; or
    (2) A U.S. legal entity.
    (b) Exclusion for passive investments. The term investment 
agreement excludes any investment that:
    (1) Is made:
    (i) Into a publicly traded security, with ``security'' defined in 
section 3(a)(10) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 
78c(a)(10)), denominated in any currency that trades on a securities 
exchange or through the method of trading that is commonly referred to 
as ``over-the-counter,'' in any jurisdiction;
    (ii) Into a security offered by:
    (A) Any ``investment company'' (as defined in section 3(a)(1) of 
the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-3(a)(1)) that is 
registered with the United States Securities and Exchange Commission, 
such as index funds, mutual funds, or exchange traded funds; or
    (B) Any company that has elected to be regulated or is regulated as 
a business development company pursuant to section 54(a) of the 
Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80a-53), or any derivative of 
either of the foregoing; or
    (iii) As a limited partner into a venture capital fund, private 
equity fund, fund of funds, or other pooled investment fund, or private 
entity, if the limited partner's contribution is solely capital and the 
limited partner cannot make managerial decisions, is not responsible 
for any debts beyond its investment, and does not have the formal or 
informal ability to influence or participate in the fund's or a U.S. 
person's decision making or operations;
    (2) Gives the covered person less than 10% in total voting and 
equity interest in a U.S. person; and
    (3) Does not give a covered person rights beyond those reasonably 
considered to be standard minority shareholder protections, including 
(a) membership or observer rights on, or the right to nominate an 
individual to a position on, the board of directors or an equivalent 
governing body of the U.S. person, or (b) any other involvement, beyond 
the voting of shares, in substantive business decisions, management, or 
strategy of the U.S. person.
    (c) Examples--(1) Example 1. A U.S. company intends to build a data 
center located in a U.S. territory. The data center will store bulk 
personal health data on U.S. persons. A foreign private equity fund 
located in a country of concern agrees to provide capital for the 
construction of the data center in exchange for acquiring a majority 
ownership stake in the data center. The agreement that gives the 
private equity fund a stake in the data center is an investment 
agreement. The investment agreement is a restricted transaction.
    (2) Example 2. A foreign technology company that is subject to the 
jurisdiction of a country of concern and that the Attorney General has 
designated as a covered person enters into a shareholders' agreement 
with a U.S. business that develops mobile games and social media apps, 
acquiring a minority equity stake in the U.S. business. The 
shareholders' agreement is an investment agreement. These games and 
apps developed by the U.S. business systematically collect bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data of its U.S. users. The investment agreement 
explicitly gives the foreign technology company the ability to access 
this data and is therefore a restricted transaction.
    (3) Example 3. Same as Example 2, but the investment agreement 
either does not explicitly give the foreign technology company the 
right to access the data or explicitly forbids that access. The 
investment agreement nonetheless provides the foreign technology 
company with the sufficient ownership interest, rights, or other 
involvement in substantive business decisions, management, or strategy 
such that the investment does not constitute a passive investment. 
Because it is not a passive investment, the ownership interest, rights, 
or other involvement in substantive business decisions, management, or 
strategy gives the foreign technology company the ability to obtain 
logical or physical access, regardless of how the agreement formally 
distributes those rights. The investment agreement therefore involves 
access to bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. The investment agreement 
is a restricted transaction.
    (4) Example 4. Same as Example 3, but the U.S. business does not 
maintain or have access to any government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data (e.g., a pre-commercial company or startup 
company). Because the data transaction cannot involve access to any 
government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data, this 
investment agreement does not meet the definition of a covered data 
transaction and is not a restricted transaction.


Sec.  202.229  Iran.

    The term Iran means the Islamic Republic of Iran, as well as any 
political subdivision, agency, or instrumentality thereof.


Sec.  202.230  Knowingly.

    (a) Definition. The term knowingly, with respect to conduct, a 
circumstance, or a result, means that a person has actual knowledge, or 
reasonably should have known, of the conduct, the circumstance, or the 
result.
    (b) Examples--(1) Example 1. A U.S. company sells DNA testing kits 
to U.S. consumers and maintains bulk human genomic data collected from 
those consumers. The U.S. company enters into a contract with a foreign 
cloud-computing company (which is not a covered person) to store the 
U.S. company's database of human genomic data. The foreign company 
hires employees from other countries, including citizens of countries 
of concern who primarily reside in a country of concern, to manage 
databases for its customers, including the U.S. company's human genomic 
database. There is no indication of evasion, such as the U.S. company 
knowingly directing the foreign company's employment agreements with 
covered persons, or the U.S. company engaging in and structuring these 
transactions to evade the regulations. The cloud-computing services 
agreement between the U.S. company and the foreign company would not be 
prohibited or restricted, because that covered data

[[Page 1714]]

transaction is between a U.S. person and a foreign company that does 
not meet the definition of a covered person. The employment agreements 
between the foreign company and the covered persons would not be 
prohibited or restricted because those agreements are between foreign 
persons.
    (2) Example 2. A U.S. company transmits the bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data of U.S. persons to a country of concern, in violation of 
this part, using a fiber optic cable operated by another U.S. company. 
The U.S. cable operator has not knowingly engaged in a prohibited 
transaction or a restricted transaction solely by virtue of operating 
the fiber optic cable because the U.S. cable operator does not know, 
and reasonably should not know, the content of the traffic transmitted 
across the fiber optic cable.
    (3) Example 3. A U.S. service provider provides a software platform 
on which a U.S. company processes the bulk U.S. sensitive personal data 
of its U.S.-person customers. While the U.S. service provider is 
generally aware of the nature of the U.S. company's business, the U.S. 
service provider is not aware of the kind or volume of data that the 
U.S. company processes on the platform, how the U.S. company uses the 
data, or whether the U.S. company engages in data transactions. The 
U.S. company also primarily controls access to its data on the 
platform, with the U.S. service provider accessing the data only for 
troubleshooting or technical support purposes, upon request by the U.S. 
company. Subsequently, without the actual knowledge of the U.S. service 
provider and without providing the U.S. service provider with any 
information from which the service provider should have known, the U.S. 
company grants access to the data on the U.S. service provider's 
software platform to a covered person through a covered data 
transaction, in violation of this part. The U.S. service provider 
itself, however, has not knowingly engaged in a restricted transaction 
by enabling the covered persons' access via its software platform.
    (4) Example 4. Same as Example 3, but in addition to providing the 
software platform, the U.S. company's contract with the U.S. service 
provider also outsources the U.S. company's processing and handling of 
the data to the U.S. service provider. As a result, the U.S. service 
provider primarily controls access to the U.S. company's bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data on the platform. The U.S. service provider 
employs a covered person and grants access to this data as part of this 
employment. Although the U.S. company's contract with the U.S. service 
provider is not a restricted transaction, the U.S. service provider's 
employment agreement with the covered person is a restricted 
transaction. The U.S. service provider has thus knowingly engaged in a 
restricted transaction by entering into an employment agreement that 
grants access to its employee because the U.S. service provider knew or 
should have known of its employee's covered person status and, as the 
party responsible for processing and handling the data, the U.S. 
service provider was aware of the kind and volume of data that the U.S. 
company processes on the platform.
    (5) Example 5. A U.S. company provides cloud storage to a U.S. 
customer for the encrypted storage of the customer's bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data. The U.S. cloud-service provider has an 
emergency back-up encryption key for all its customers' data, but the 
company is contractually limited to using the key to decrypt the data 
only at the customer's request. The U.S. customer's systems and access 
to the key become disabled, and the U.S. customer requests that the 
cloud-service provider use the back-up encryption key to decrypt the 
data and store it on a backup server while the customer restores its 
own systems. By having access to and using the backup encryption key to 
decrypt the data in accordance with the contractual limitation, the 
U.S. cloud-service provider does not and reasonably should not know the 
kind and volumes of the U.S. customer's data. If the U.S. customer 
later uses the cloud storage to knowingly engage in a prohibited 
transaction, the U.S. cloud-service provider's access to and use of the 
backup encryption key does not mean that the U.S. cloud-service 
provider has also knowingly engaged in a restricted transaction.
    (6) Example 6. A prominent human genomics research clinic enters 
into a cloud-services contract with a U.S. cloud-service provider that 
specializes in storing and processing healthcare data to store bulk 
human genomic research data. The cloud-service provider hires IT 
personnel in a country of concern, who are thus covered persons. While 
the data that is stored is encrypted, the IT personnel can access the 
data in encrypted form. The employment agreement between the U.S. 
cloud-service provider and the IT professionals in the country of 
concern is a prohibited transaction because the agreement involves 
giving the IT personnel access to the encrypted data and constitutes a 
transfer of human genomic data. Given the nature of the research 
institution's work and the cloud-service provider's expertise in 
storing healthcare data, the cloud-service provider reasonably should 
have known that the encrypted data is bulk U.S. sensitive personal data 
covered by the regulations. The cloud-service provider has therefore 
knowingly engaged in a prohibited transaction (because it involves 
access to human genomic data).


Sec.  202.231  Licenses; general and specific.

    (a) General license. The term general license means a written 
license issued pursuant to this part authorizing a class of 
transactions and not limited to a particular person.
    (b) Specific license. The term specific license means a written 
license issued pursuant to this part to a particular person or persons, 
authorizing a particular transaction or transactions in response to a 
written license application.


Sec.  202.232  Linked.

    (a) Definition. The term linked means associated.
    (b) Examples--(1) Example 1. A U.S. person transfers two listed 
identifiers in a single spreadsheet--such as a list of names of 
individuals and associated MAC addresses for those individuals' 
devices. The names and MAC addresses would be considered linked.
    (2) Example 2. A U.S. person transfers two listed identifiers in 
different spreadsheets--such as a list of names of individuals in one 
spreadsheet and MAC addresses in another spreadsheet--to two related 
parties in two different covered data transactions. The names and MAC 
addresses would be considered linked, provided that some correlation 
existed between the names and MAC addresses (e.g., associated employee 
ID number is also listed in both spreadsheets).
    (3) Example 3. A U.S. person transfers a standalone list of MAC 
addresses, without any additional listed identifiers. The standalone 
list does not include covered personal identifiers. That standalone 
list of MAC addresses would not become covered personal identifiers 
even if the receiving party is capable of obtaining separate sets of 
other listed identifiers or sensitive personal data through separate 
covered data transactions with unaffiliated parties that would 
ultimately permit the association of the MAC addresses to specific 
persons. The MAC addresses would not be considered linked or linkable 
to those separate sets of other listed identifiers or sensitive 
personal data.

[[Page 1715]]

Sec.  202.233  Linkable.

    The term linkable means reasonably capable of being linked.
    Note to Sec.  202.233. Data is considered linkable when the 
identifiers involved in a single covered data transaction, or in 
multiple covered data transactions or a course of dealing between the 
same or related parties, are reasonably capable of being associated 
with the same person(s). Identifiers are not linked or linkable when 
additional identifiers or data not involved in the relevant covered 
data transaction(s) would be necessary to associate the identifiers 
with the same specific person(s).


Sec.  202.234  Listed identifier.

    The term listed identifier means any piece of data in any of the 
following data fields:
    (a) Full or truncated government identification or account number 
(such as a Social Security number, driver's license or State 
identification number, passport number, or Alien Registration Number);
    (b) Full financial account numbers or personal identification 
numbers associated with a financial institution or financial-services 
company;
    (c) Device-based or hardware-based identifier (such as 
International Mobile Equipment Identity (``IMEI''), Media Access 
Control (``MAC'') address, or Subscriber Identity Module (``SIM'') card 
number);
    (d) Demographic or contact data (such as first and last name, birth 
date, birthplace, ZIP code, residential street or postal address, phone 
number, email address, or similar public account identifiers);
    (e) Advertising identifier (such as Google Advertising ID, Apple ID 
for Advertisers, or other mobile advertising ID (``MAID''));
    (f) Account-authentication data (such as account username, account 
password, or an answer to security questions);
    (g) Network-based identifier (such as Internet Protocol (``IP'') 
address or cookie data); or
    (h) Call-detail data (such as Customer Proprietary Network 
Information (``CPNI'')).


Sec.  202.235  National Security Division.

    The term National Security Division means the National Security 
Division of the United States Department of Justice.


Sec.  202.236  North Korea.

    The term North Korea means the Democratic People's Republic of 
North Korea, and any political subdivision, agency, or instrumentality 
thereof.


Sec.  202.237  Order.

    The term Order means Executive Order 14117 of February 28, 2024 
(Preventing Access to Americans' Bulk Sensitive Personal Data and 
United States Government-Related Data by Countries of Concern), 89 FR 
15421 (March 1, 2024).


Sec.  202.238  Person.

    The term person means an individual or entity.


Sec.  202.239  Personal communications.

    The term personal communications means any postal, telegraphic, 
telephonic, or other personal communication that does not involve the 
transfer of anything of value, as set out under 50 U.S.C. 1702(b)(1).


Sec.  202.240  Personal financial data.

    The term personal financial data means data about an individual's 
credit, charge, or debit card, or bank account, including purchases and 
payment history; data in a bank, credit, or other financial statement, 
including assets, liabilities, debts, or trades in a securities 
portfolio; or data in a credit report or in a ``consumer report'' (as 
defined in 15 U.S.C. 1681a(d)).


Sec.  202.241  Personal health data.

    The term personal health data means health information that 
indicates, reveals, or describes the past, present, or future physical 
or mental health or condition of an individual; the provision of 
healthcare to an individual; or the past, present, or future payment 
for the provision of healthcare to an individual. This term includes 
basic physical measurements and health attributes (such as bodily 
functions, height and weight, vital signs, symptoms, and allergies); 
social, psychological, behavioral, and medical diagnostic, 
intervention, and treatment history; test results; logs of exercise 
habits; immunization data; data on reproductive and sexual health; and 
data on the use or purchase of prescribed medications.


Sec.  202.242  Precise geolocation data.

    The term precise geolocation data means data, whether real-time or 
historical, that identifies the physical location of an individual or a 
device with a precision of within 1,000 meters.


Sec.  202.243  Prohibited transaction.

    The term prohibited transaction means a data transaction that is 
subject to one or more of the prohibitions described in subpart C of 
this part.


Sec.  202.244  Property; property interest.

    The terms property and property interest include money; checks; 
drafts; bullion; bank deposits; savings accounts; debts; indebtedness; 
obligations; notes; guarantees; debentures; stocks; bonds; coupons; any 
other financial instruments; bankers acceptances; mortgages, pledges, 
liens, or other rights in the nature of security; warehouse receipts, 
bills of lading, trust receipts, bills of sale, or any other evidences 
of title, ownership, or indebtedness; letters of credit and any 
documents relating to any rights or obligations thereunder; powers of 
attorney; goods; wares; merchandise; chattels; stocks on hand; ships; 
goods on ships; real estate mortgages; deeds of trust; vendors' sales 
agreements; land contracts, leaseholds, ground rents, real estate and 
any other interest therein; options; negotiable instruments; trade 
acceptances; royalties; book accounts; accounts payable; judgments; 
patents; trademarks or copyrights; insurance policies; safe deposit 
boxes and their contents; annuities; pooling agreements; services of 
any nature whatsoever; contracts of any nature whatsoever; any other 
property, real, personal, or mixed, tangible or intangible, or interest 
or interests therein, present, future, or contingent.


Sec.  202.245  Recent former employees or contractors.

    The terms recent former employees or recent former contractors mean 
employees or contractors who worked for or provided services to the 
United States Government, in a paid or unpaid status, within the past 2 
years of a potential covered data transaction.


Sec.  202.246  Restricted transaction.

    The term restricted transaction means a data transaction that is 
subject to subpart D of this part.


Sec.  202.247  Russia.

    The term Russia means the Russian Federation, and any political 
subdivision, agency, or instrumentality thereof.


Sec.  202.248  Security requirements.

    The term security requirements means the Cybersecurity and 
Infrastructure Agency (``CISA'') Security Requirements for Restricted 
Transactions E.O. 14117 Implementation, January 2025. This material is 
incorporated by reference into this section with the approval of the 
Director of the Federal Register under 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 
51. This incorporation by reference (``IBR'') material is available for 
inspection at the Department of Justice and at the

[[Page 1716]]

National Archives and Records Administration (``NARA''). Please contact 
the Foreign Investment Review Section, National Security Division, U.S. 
Department of Justice, 175 N St. NE, Washington, DC 20002, telephone: 
202-514-8648, NSD.FIRS.datasecurity@usdoj.gov; www.justice.gov/nsd. For 
information on the availability of this material at NARA, visit 
www.archives.gov/federal-register/cfr/ibr-locations or email 
fr.inspection@nara.gov. The material may be obtained from the National 
Security Division and the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security 
Agency (CISA), Mail Stop 0380, Department of Homeland Security, 245 
Murray Lane, Washington, DC 20528-0380; central@cisa.gov; 888-282-0870; 
www.cisa.gov/.


Sec.  202.249  Sensitive personal data.

    (a) Definition. The term sensitive personal data means covered 
personal identifiers, precise geolocation data, biometric identifiers, 
human `omic data, personal health data, personal financial data, or any 
combination thereof.
    (b) Exclusions. The term sensitive personal data, and each of the 
categories of sensitive personal data, excludes:
    (1) Public or nonpublic data that does not relate to an individual, 
including such data that meets the definition of a ``trade secret'' (as 
defined in 18 U.S.C. 1839(3)) or ``proprietary information'' (as 
defined in 50 U.S.C. 1708(d)(7));
    (2) Data that is, at the time of the transaction, lawfully 
available to the public from a Federal, State, or local government 
record (such as court records) or in widely distributed media (such as 
sources that are generally available to the public through unrestricted 
and open-access repositories);
    (3) Personal communications; and
    (4) Information or informational materials and ordinarily 
associated metadata or metadata reasonably necessary to enable the 
transmission or dissemination of such information or informational 
materials.


Sec.  202.250  Special Administrative Region of Hong Kong.

    The term Special Administrative Region of Hong Kong means the 
Special Administrative Region of Hong Kong, and any political 
subdivision, agency, or instrumentality thereof.


Sec.  202.251  Special Administrative Region of Macau.

    The term Special Administrative Region of Macau means the Special 
Administrative Region of Macau, and any political subdivision, agency, 
or instrumentality thereof.


Sec.  202.252  Telecommunications service.

    The term telecommunications service means the provision of voice 
and data communications services regardless of format or mode of 
delivery, including communications services delivered over cable, 
Internet Protocol, wireless, fiber, or other transmission mechanisms, 
as well as arrangements for network interconnection, transport, 
messaging, routing, or international voice, text, and data roaming.


Sec.  202.253  Transaction.

    The term transaction means any acquisition, holding, use, transfer, 
transportation, exportation of, or dealing in any property in which a 
foreign country or national thereof has an interest.


Sec.  202.254  Transfer.

    The term transfer means any actual or purported act or transaction, 
whether or not evidenced by writing, and whether or not done or 
performed within the United States, the purpose, intent, or effect of 
which is to create, surrender, release, convey, transfer, or alter, 
directly or indirectly, any right, remedy, power, privilege, or 
interest with respect to any property. Without limitation on the 
foregoing, it shall include the making, execution, or delivery of any 
assignment, power, conveyance, check, declaration, deed, deed of trust, 
power of attorney, power of appointment, bill of sale, mortgage, 
receipt, agreement, contract, certificate, gift, sale, affidavit, or 
statement; the making of any payment; the setting off of any obligation 
or credit; the appointment of any agent, trustee, or fiduciary; the 
creation or transfer of any lien; the issuance, docketing, filing, or 
levy of or under any judgment, decree, attachment, injunction, 
execution, or other judicial or administrative process or order, or the 
service of any garnishment; the acquisition of any interest of any 
nature whatsoever by reason of a judgment or decree of any foreign 
country; the fulfillment of any condition; the exercise of any power of 
appointment, power of attorney, or other power; or the acquisition, 
disposition, transportation, importation, exportation, or withdrawal of 
any security.


Sec.  202.255  United States.

    The term United States means the United States, its territories and 
possessions, and all areas under the jurisdiction or authority thereof.


Sec.  202.256  United States person or U.S. person.

    (a) Definition. The terms United States person and U.S. person mean 
any United States citizen, national, or lawful permanent resident; any 
individual admitted to the United States as a refugee under 8 U.S.C. 
1157 or granted asylum under 8 U.S.C. 1158; any entity organized solely 
under the laws of the United States or any jurisdiction within the 
United States (including foreign branches); or any person in the United 
States.
    (b) Examples--(1) Example 1. An individual is a citizen of a 
country of concern and is in the United States. The individual is a 
U.S. person.
    (2) Example 2. An individual is a U.S. citizen. The individual is a 
U.S. person, regardless of location.
    (3) Example 3. An individual is a dual citizen of the United States 
and a country of concern. The individual is a U.S. person, regardless 
of location.
    (4) Example 4. An individual is a citizen of a country of concern, 
is not a permanent resident alien of the United States, and is outside 
the United States. The individual is a foreign person.
    (5) Example 5. A company is organized under the laws of the United 
States and has a foreign branch in a country of concern. The company, 
including its foreign branch, is a U.S. person.
    (6) Example 6. A parent company is organized under the laws of the 
United States and has a subsidiary organized under the laws of a 
country of concern. The subsidiary is a foreign person regardless of 
the degree of ownership by the parent company; the parent company is a 
U.S. person.
    (7) Example 7. A company is organized under the laws of a country 
of concern and has a branch in the United States. The company, 
including its U.S. branch, is a foreign person.
    (8) Example 8. A parent company is organized under the laws of a 
country of concern and has a subsidiary organized under the laws of the 
United States. The subsidiary is a U.S. person regardless of the degree 
of ownership by the parent company; the parent company is a foreign 
person.


Sec.  202.257  U.S. device.

    The term U.S. device means any device with the capacity to store or 
transmit data that is linked or linkable to a U.S. person.


Sec.  202.258  Vendor agreement.

    (a) Definition. The term vendor agreement means any agreement or 
arrangement, other than an employment agreement, in which any person 
provides goods or services to another person, including cloud-computing 
services, in exchange for payment or other consideration.

[[Page 1717]]

    (b) Examples--(1) Example 1. A U.S. company collects bulk precise 
geolocation data from U.S. users through an app. The U.S. company 
enters into an agreement with a company headquartered in a country of 
concern to process and store this data. This vendor agreement is a 
restricted transaction.
    (2) Example 2. A medical facility in the United States contracts 
with a company headquartered in a country of concern to provide IT-
related services. The contract governing the provision of services is a 
vendor agreement. The medical facility has bulk personal health data on 
its U.S. patients. The IT services provided under the contract involve 
access to the medical facility's systems containing the bulk personal 
health data. This vendor agreement is a restricted transaction.
    (3) Example 3. A U.S. company, which is owned by an entity 
headquartered in a country of concern and has been designated a covered 
person, establishes a new data center in the United States to offer 
managed services. The U.S. company's data center serves as a vendor to 
various U.S. companies to store bulk U.S. sensitive personal data 
collected by those companies. These vendor agreements are restricted 
transactions.
    (4) Example 4. A U.S. company develops mobile games that collect 
bulk precise geolocation data and biometric identifiers of U.S.-person 
users. The U.S. company contracts part of the software development to a 
foreign person who is primarily resident in a country of concern and is 
a covered person. The contract with the foreign person is a vendor 
agreement. The software-development services provided by the covered 
person under the contract involve access to the bulk precise 
geolocation data and biometric identifiers. This is a restricted 
transaction.
    (5) Example 5. A U.S. multinational company maintains bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data of U.S. persons. This company has a foreign 
branch, located in a country of concern, that has access to this data. 
The foreign branch contracts with a local company located in the 
country of concern to provide cleaning services for the foreign 
branch's facilities. The contract is a vendor agreement, the foreign 
branch is a U.S. person, and the local company is a covered person. 
Because the services performed under this vendor agreement do not 
``involve access to'' the bulk U.S. sensitive personal data, the vendor 
agreement would not be a covered data transaction.


Sec.  202.259  Venezuela.

    The term Venezuela means the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, and 
any political subdivision, agency, or instrumentality thereof.

Subpart C--Prohibited Transactions and Related Activities


Sec.  202.301  Prohibited data-brokerage transactions.

    (a) Prohibition. Except as otherwise authorized pursuant to 
subparts E or H of this part or any other provision of this part, no 
U.S. person, on or after the effective date, may knowingly engage in a 
covered data transaction involving data brokerage with a country of 
concern or covered person.
    (b) Examples--(1) Example 1. A U.S. subsidiary of a company 
headquartered in a country of concern develops an artificial 
intelligence chatbot in the United States that is trained on the bulk 
U.S. sensitive personal data of U.S. persons. While not its primary 
commercial use, the chatbot is capable of reproducing or otherwise 
disclosing the bulk U.S. sensitive personal health data that was used 
to train the chatbot when responding to queries. The U.S. subsidiary 
knowingly licenses subscription-based access to that chatbot worldwide, 
including to covered persons such as its parent entity. Although 
licensing use of the chatbot itself may not necessarily ``involve 
access'' to bulk U.S. sensitive personal data, the U.S. subsidiary 
knows or should know that the license can be used to obtain access to 
the U.S. persons' bulk sensitive personal training data if prompted. 
The licensing of access to this bulk U.S. sensitive personal data is 
data brokerage because it involves the transfer of data from the U.S. 
company (i.e., the provider) to licensees (i.e., the recipients), where 
the recipients did not collect or process the data directly from the 
individuals linked or linkable to the collected or processed data. Even 
though the license did not explicitly provide access to the data, this 
is a prohibited transaction because the U.S. company knew or should 
have known that the use of the chatbot pursuant to the license could be 
used to obtain access to the training data, and because the U.S. 
company licensed the product to covered persons.
    (2) [Reserved]


Sec.  202.302  Other prohibited data-brokerage transactions involving 
potential onward transfer to countries of concern or covered persons.

    (a) Prohibition. Except as otherwise authorized pursuant to this 
part, no U.S. person, on or after the effective date, may knowingly 
engage in any transaction that involves any access by a foreign person 
to government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data and 
that involves data brokerage with any foreign person that is not a 
covered person unless the U.S. person:
    (1) Contractually requires that the foreign person refrain from 
engaging in a subsequent covered data transaction involving data 
brokerage of the same data with a country of concern or covered person; 
and
    (2) Reports any known or suspected violations of this contractual 
requirement in accordance with paragraph (b) of this section.
    (b) Reporting known or suspected violations--(1) When reports are 
due. U.S. persons shall file reports within 14 days of the U.S. person 
becoming aware of a known or suspected violation.
    (2) Contents of reports. Reports on known or suspected violations 
shall include the following, to the extent the information is known and 
available to the person filing the report at the time of the report:
    (i) The name and address of the U.S. person reporting the known or 
suspected violation of the contractual requirement in accordance with 
paragraph (b) of this section;
    (ii) A description of the known or suspected violation, including:
    (A) Date of known or suspected violation;
    (B) Description of the data-brokerage transaction referenced in 
paragraph (a) of this section;
    (C) Description of the contractual provision prohibiting the onward 
transfer of the same data to a country of concern or covered person;
    (D) Description of the known or suspected violation of the 
contractual obligation prohibiting the foreign person from engaging in 
a subsequent covered data transaction involving the same data with a 
country of concern or a covered person;
    (E) Any persons substantively participating in the transaction 
referenced in paragraph (a) of this section;
    (F) Information about the known or suspected persons involved in 
the onward data transfer transaction, including the name and location 
of any covered persons or countries of concern;
    (G) A copy of any relevant documentation received or created in 
connection with the transaction; and
    (iii) Any other information that the Department of Justice may 
require or any other information that the U.S. person filing the report 
believes to be pertinent to the known or suspected violation or the 
implicated covered person.

[[Page 1718]]

    (3) Additional contents; format and method of submission. Reports 
required by this section must be submitted in accordance with this 
section and with subpart L of this part.
    (c) Examples--(1) Example 1. A U.S. business knowingly enters into 
an agreement to sell bulk human genomic data to a European business 
that is not a covered person. The U.S. business is required to include 
in that agreement a limitation on the European business' right to 
resell or otherwise engage in a covered data transaction involving data 
brokerage of that data to a country of concern or covered person. 
Otherwise, the agreement would be a prohibited transaction.
    (2) Example 2. A U.S. company owns and operates a mobile app for 
U.S. users with available advertising space. As part of selling the 
advertising space, the U.S. company provides the bulk precise 
geolocation data, IP address, and advertising IDs of its U.S. users' 
devices to an advertising exchange based in Europe that is not a 
covered person. The U.S. company's provision of this data to the 
advertising exchange is data brokerage and a prohibited transaction 
unless the U.S. company obtains a contractual commitment from the 
advertising exchange not to engage in any covered data transactions 
involving data brokerage of that same data with a country of concern or 
covered person.
    (3) Example 3. A U.S. business knowingly enters into an agreement 
to buy bulk human genomic data from a European business that is not a 
covered person. This provision does not require the U.S. business to 
include any contractual limitation because the transaction does not 
involve access by the foreign person.


Sec.  202.303  Prohibited human `omic data and human biospecimen 
transactions.

    Except as otherwise authorized pursuant to this part, no U.S. 
person, on or after the effective date, may knowingly engage in any 
covered data transaction with a country of concern or covered person 
that involves access by that country of concern or covered person to 
bulk U.S. sensitive personal data that involves bulk human `omic data, 
or to human biospecimens from which bulk human `omic data could be 
derived.


Sec.  202.304  Prohibited evasions, attempts, causing violations, and 
conspiracies.

    (a) Prohibition. Any transaction on or after the effective date 
that has the purpose of evading or avoiding, causes a violation of, or 
attempts to violate any of the prohibitions set forth in this part is 
prohibited. Any conspiracy formed to violate the prohibitions set forth 
in this part is prohibited.
    (b) Examples--(1) Example 1. A U.S. data broker seeks to sell bulk 
U.S. sensitive personal data to a foreign person who primarily resides 
in China. With knowledge that the foreign person is a covered person 
and with the intent to evade the regulations, the U.S. data broker 
invites the foreign person to travel to the United States to consummate 
the data transaction and transfer the bulk U.S. sensitive personal data 
in the United States. After completing the transaction, the person 
returns to China with the bulk U.S. sensitive personal data. The 
transaction in the United States is not a covered data transaction 
because the person who resides in China is a U.S. person while in the 
United States (unless that person was individually designated as a 
covered person pursuant to Sec.  202.211(a)(5), in which case their 
covered person status would remain, even while in the United States, 
and the transaction would be a covered data transaction). However, the 
U.S. data broker has structured the transaction to evade the 
regulation's prohibitions on covered data transactions with covered 
persons. As a result, this transaction has the purpose of evading the 
regulations and is prohibited.
    (2) Example 2. A Russian national, who is employed by a corporation 
headquartered in Russia, travels to the United States to conduct 
business with the Russian company's U.S. subsidiary, including with the 
purpose of obtaining bulk U.S. sensitive personal data from the U.S. 
subsidiary. The U.S. subsidiary is a U.S. person, the Russian 
corporation is a covered person, and the Russian employee is a covered 
person while outside the United States but a U.S. person while 
temporarily in the United States (unless that Russian employee was 
individually designated as a covered person pursuant to Sec.  
202.211(a)(5), in which case their covered person status would remain, 
even while in the United States, and the transaction would be a covered 
data transaction). With knowledge of these facts, the U.S. subsidiary 
licenses access to bulk U.S. sensitive personal data to the Russian 
employee while in the United States, who then returns to Russia. This 
transaction has the purpose of evading the regulations and is 
prohibited.
    (3) Example 3. A U.S. subsidiary of a company headquartered in a 
country of concern collects bulk precise geolocation data from U.S. 
persons. The U.S. subsidiary is a U.S. person, and the parent company 
is a covered person. With the purpose of evading the regulations, the 
U.S. subsidiary enters into a vendor agreement with a foreign company 
that is not a covered person. The vendor agreement provides the foreign 
company access to the data. The U.S. subsidiary knows (or reasonably 
should know) that the foreign company is a shell company, and knows 
that it subsequently outsources the vendor agreement to the U.S. 
subsidiary's parent company. This transaction has the purpose of 
evading the regulations and is prohibited.
    (4) Example 4. A U.S. company collects bulk personal health data 
from U.S. persons. With the purpose of evading the regulations, the 
U.S. company enters into a vendor agreement with a foreign company that 
is not a covered person. The agreement provides the foreign company 
access to the data. The U.S. company knows (or reasonably should know) 
that the foreign company is a front company staffed primarily by 
covered persons. The U.S. company has not complied with either the 
security requirements in Sec.  202.248 or other applicable requirements 
for conducting restricted transactions as detailed in subpart J of this 
part. This transaction has the purpose of evading the regulations and 
is prohibited.
    (5) Example 5. A U.S. online gambling company uses an artificial 
intelligence algorithm to analyze collected bulk covered personal 
identifiers to identify users based on impulsivity for targeted 
advertising. The algorithm is trained on bulk covered personal 
identifiers and may reveal that raw data. A U.S. subsidiary of a 
company headquartered in a country of concern knows that the algorithm 
can reveal the training data. For the purpose of evasion, the U.S. 
subsidiary licenses the derivative algorithm from the U.S. online 
gambling company for the purpose of accessing bulk sensitive personal 
identifiers from the training data that would not otherwise be 
accessible to the parent company and shares the algorithm with the 
parent company so that the parent company can obtain the bulk covered 
personal identifiers. The U.S. subsidiary's licensing transaction with 
the parent company has the purpose of evading the regulations and is 
prohibited.


Sec.  202.305  Knowingly directing prohibited or restricted 
transactions.

    (a) Prohibition. Except as otherwise authorized pursuant to this 
part, no U.S. person, on or after the effective date, may knowingly 
direct any covered data transaction that would be a prohibited 
transaction or restricted transaction that fails to comply with the 
requirements of subpart D of this part and all other

[[Page 1719]]

applicable requirements under this part, if engaged in by a U.S. 
person.
    (b) Examples--(1) Example 1. A U.S. person is an officer, senior 
manager, or equivalent senior-level employee at a foreign company that 
is not a covered person, and the foreign company undertakes a covered 
data transaction at that U.S. person's direction or with that U.S. 
person's approval when the covered data transaction would be prohibited 
if performed by a U.S. person. The U.S. person has knowingly directed a 
prohibited transaction.
    (2) Example 2. Several U.S. persons launch, own, and operate a 
foreign company that is not a covered person, and that foreign company, 
under the U.S. persons' operation, undertakes covered data transactions 
that would be prohibited if performed by a U.S. person. The U.S. 
persons have knowingly directed a prohibited transaction.
    (3) Example 3. A U.S. person is employed at a U.S.-headquartered 
multinational company that has a foreign affiliate that is not a 
covered person. The U.S. person instructs the U.S. company's compliance 
unit to change (or approve changes to) the operating policies and 
procedures of the foreign affiliate with the specific purpose of 
allowing the foreign affiliate to undertake covered data transactions 
that would be prohibited if performed by a U.S. person. The U.S. person 
has knowingly directed prohibited transactions.
    (4) Example 4. A U.S. bank processes a payment from a U.S. person 
to a covered person, or from a covered person to a U.S. person, as part 
of that U.S. person's engagement in a prohibited transaction. The U.S. 
bank has not knowingly directed a prohibited transaction, and its 
activity would not be prohibited (although the U.S. person's covered 
data transaction would be prohibited).
    (5) Example 5. A U.S. financial institution underwrites a loan or 
otherwise provides financing for a foreign company that is not a 
covered person, and the foreign company undertakes covered data 
transactions that would be prohibited if performed by a U.S. person. 
The U.S. financial institution has not knowingly directed a prohibited 
transaction, and its activity would not be prohibited.
    (6) Example 6. A U.S. person, who is employed at a foreign company 
that is not a covered person, signs paperwork approving the foreign 
company's procurement of real estate for its operations. The same 
foreign company separately conducts data transactions that use or are 
facilitated by operations at that real estate location and that would 
be prohibited transactions if performed by a U.S. person, but the U.S. 
employee has no role in approving or directing those separate data 
transactions. The U.S. person has not knowingly directed a prohibited 
transaction, and the U.S. person's activity would not be prohibited.
    (7) Example 7. A U.S. company owns or operates a submarine 
telecommunications cable with one landing point in a foreign country 
that is not a country of concern and one landing point in a country of 
concern. The U.S. company leases capacity on the cable to U.S. 
customers that transmit bulk U.S. sensitive personal data to the 
landing point in the country of concern, including transmissions as 
part of prohibited transactions. The U.S. company's ownership or 
operation of the cable does not constitute knowingly directing a 
prohibited transaction, and its ownership or operation of the cable 
would not be prohibited (although the U.S. customers' covered data 
transactions would be prohibited).
    (8) Example 8. A U.S. person engages in a vendor agreement 
involving bulk U.S. sensitive personal data with a foreign person who 
is not a covered person. Such vendor agreement is not a restricted or 
prohibited transaction. The foreign person then employs an individual 
who is a covered person and grants them access to bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data without the U.S. person's knowledge or direction. There 
is no covered data transaction between the U.S. person and the covered 
person, and there is no indication that the parties engaged in these 
transactions with the purpose of evading the regulations (such as the 
U.S. person having knowingly directed the foreign person's employment 
agreement with the covered person or the parties knowingly structuring 
a restricted transaction into these multiple transactions with the 
purpose of evading the prohibition). The U.S. person has not knowingly 
directed a restricted transaction.
    (9) Example 9. A U.S. company sells DNA testing kits to U.S. 
consumers and maintains bulk human genomic data collected from those 
consumers. The U.S. company enters into a contract with a foreign 
cloud-computing company (which is not a covered person) to store the 
U.S. company's database of human genomic data. The foreign company 
hires employees from other countries, including citizens of countries 
of concern who primarily reside in a country of concern, to manage 
databases for its customers, including the U.S. company's human genomic 
database. There is no indication of evasion, such as the U.S. company 
knowingly directing the foreign company's employment agreements or the 
U.S. company knowingly engaging in and structuring these transactions 
to evade the regulations. The cloud-computing services agreement 
between the U.S. company and the foreign company would not be 
prohibited or restricted because that transaction is between a U.S. 
person and a foreign company that does not meet the definition of a 
covered person. The employment agreements between the foreign company 
and the covered persons would not be prohibited or restricted because 
those agreements are between foreign persons.

Subpart D--Restricted Transactions


Sec.  202.401  Authorization to conduct restricted transactions.

    (a) Restricted transactions. Except as otherwise authorized 
pursuant to subparts E or H of this part or any other provision of this 
part, no U.S. person, on or after the effective date, may knowingly 
engage in a covered data transaction involving a vendor agreement, 
employment agreement, or investment agreement with a country of concern 
or covered person unless the U.S. person complies with the security 
requirements (as defined by Sec.  202.408) required by this subpart D 
and all other applicable requirements under this part.
    (b) This subpart D does not apply to covered data transactions 
involving access to bulk human `omic data or human biospecimens from 
which such data can be derived, and which are subject to the 
prohibition in Sec.  202.303.
    (c) Examples--(1) Example 1. A U.S. company engages in an 
employment agreement with a covered person to provide information 
technology support. As part of their employment, the covered person has 
access to personal financial data. The U.S. company implements and 
complies with the security requirements. The employment agreement is 
authorized as a restricted transaction because the company has complied 
with the security requirements.
    (2) Example 2. A U.S. company engages in a vendor agreement with a 
covered person to store bulk personal health data. Instead of 
implementing the security requirements as identified by reference in 
this subpart D, the U.S. company implements different controls that it 
believes mitigate the covered person's access to the bulk personal 
health data. Because the U.S. person has not complied with the security 
requirements, the vendor agreement is

[[Page 1720]]

not authorized and thus is a prohibited transaction.
    (3) Example 3. A U.S. person engages in a vendor agreement 
involving bulk U.S. sensitive personal data with a foreign person who 
is not a covered person. The foreign person then employs an individual 
who is a covered person and grants them access to bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data without the U.S. person's knowledge or direction. There 
is no covered data transaction between the U.S. person and the covered 
person, and there is no indication that the parties engaged in these 
transactions with the purpose of evading the regulations (such as the 
U.S. person having knowingly directed the foreign person's employment 
agreement with the covered person or the parties knowingly structuring 
a prohibited transaction into these multiple transactions with the 
purpose of evading the prohibition). As a result, neither the vendor 
agreement nor the employment agreement would be a restricted 
transaction.


Sec.  202.402  [Reserved]

Subpart E--Exempt Transactions


Sec.  202.501  Personal communications.

    This part does not apply to data transactions to the extent that 
they involve any postal, telegraphic, telephonic, or other personal 
communication that does not involve the transfer of anything of value.


Sec.  202.502  Information or informational materials.

    This part does not apply to data transactions to the extent that 
they involve the importation from any country, or the exportation to 
any country, whether commercial or otherwise, regardless of format or 
medium of transmission, of any information or informational materials.


Sec.  202.503  Travel.

    This part does not apply to data transactions to the extent that 
they are ordinarily incident to travel to or from any country, 
including importation of accompanied baggage for personal use; 
maintenance within any country, including payment of living expenses 
and acquisition of goods or services for personal use; and arrangement 
or facilitation of such travel, including nonscheduled air, sea, or 
land voyages.


Sec.  202.504  Official business of the United States Government.

    (a) Exemption. Subparts C, and D, J, and K (other than Sec.  
202.1102 and Sec.  202.1104) of this part do not apply to data 
transactions to the extent that they are for the conduct of the 
official business of the United States Government by its employees, 
grantees, or contractors; any authorized activity of any United States 
Government department or agency (including an activity that is 
performed by a Federal depository institution or credit union 
supervisory agency in the capacity of receiver or conservator); or 
transactions conducted pursuant to a grant, contract, or other 
agreement entered into with the United States Government.
    (b) Examples--(1) Example 1. A U.S. hospital receives a Federal 
grant to conduct human genomic research on U.S. persons. As part of 
that federally funded human genomic research, the U.S. hospital 
contracts with a foreign laboratory that is a covered person, hires a 
researcher that is a covered person, and gives the laboratory and 
researcher access to the human biospecimens and human genomic data in 
bulk. The contract with the foreign laboratory and the employment of 
the researcher are exempt transactions but would be prohibited 
transactions if they were not part of the federally funded research.
    (2) Example 2. A U.S. research institution receives a Federal grant 
to conduct human genomic research on U.S. and foreign persons. The 
Federal grant directs the U.S. research institution to publicize the 
results of its research, including the underlying human genomic data, 
via an internet-accessible database open to public health researchers 
with valid log-in credentials who pay a small annual fee to access the 
database, including covered persons primarily resident in a country of 
concern. The Federal grant does not cover the full costs of the 
authorized human genomic research or creation and publication of the 
database. The U.S. research institution obtains funds from private 
institutions and donors to fund the remaining costs. The human genomic 
research authorized by the Federal grant and publication of the 
database at the direction of the Federal grant would constitute a 
``transaction[ ] conducted pursuant to a grant, contract, or other 
agreement entered into with the United States Government.'' The U.S. 
research institution must still comply with any requirements or 
prohibitions on sharing bulk U.S. sensitive personal data with 
countries of concern or covered persons required by the Federal 
grantmaker.
    (3) Example 3. Same as Example 2, but the Federal grant is limited 
in scope to funding the U.S. research institution's purchase of 
equipment needed to conduct the human genomic research and does not 
include funding related to publication of the data. The Federal grant 
does not direct or authorize the U.S. research institution to publicize 
the human genomic research or make it available to country of concern 
or covered person researchers via the database for which researchers 
pay an annual fee to access, or otherwise fund the conduct of the human 
genomic research. The U.S. research institution contracts with a 
foreign laboratory that is a covered person and gives the laboratory 
access to the bulk human genomic data. The contract with the foreign 
laboratory is not an exempt transaction because that transaction is not 
within the scope of the Federal grant.


Sec.  202.505  Financial services.

    (a) Exemption. Subparts C, D, J, and K (other than Sec.  202.1102 
and Sec.  202.1104) of this part do not apply to data transactions, to 
the extent that they are ordinarily incident to and part of the 
provision of financial services, including:
    (1) Banking, capital-markets (including investment-management 
services as well as trading and underwriting of securities, 
commodities, and derivatives), or financial-insurance services;
    (2) A financial activity authorized for national banks by 12 U.S.C. 
24 (Seventh) and rules and regulations and written interpretations of 
the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency thereunder;
    (3) An activity that is ``financial in nature or incidental to such 
financial activity'' or ``complementary to a financial activity,'' 
section (k)(1), as set forth in section (k)(4) of the Bank Holding 
Company Act of 1956 (12 U.S.C. 1843(k)(4)) and rules and regulations 
and written interpretations of the Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System thereunder;
    (4) The transfer of personal financial data or covered personal 
identifiers incidental to the purchase and sale of goods and services 
(such as the purchase, sale, or transfer of consumer products and 
services through online shopping or e-commerce marketplaces);
    (5) The provision or processing of payments or funds transfers 
(such as person-to-person, business-to-person, and government-to-person 
funds transfers) involving the transfer of personal financial data or 
covered personal identifiers, or the provision of services ancillary to 
processing payments and funds transfers (such as services for payment 
dispute resolution, payor authentication, tokenization, payment 
gateway, payment fraud detection, payment resiliency, mitigation and 
prevention, and

[[Page 1721]]

payment-related loyalty point program administration); and
    (6) The provision of investment-management services that manage or 
provide advice on investment portfolios or individual assets for 
compensation (such as devising strategies and handling financial assets 
and other investments for clients) or provide services ancillary to 
investment-management services (such as broker-dealers or futures 
commission merchants executing trades within an investment portfolio 
based upon instructions from an investment advisor).
    (b) Examples--(1) Example 1. A U.S. company engages in a data 
transaction to transfer personal financial data in bulk to a financial 
institution that is incorporated in, located in, or subject to the 
jurisdiction or control of a country of concern to clear and settle 
electronic payment transactions between U.S. individuals and merchants 
in a country of concern where both the U.S. individuals and the 
merchants use the U.S. company's infrastructure, such as an e-commerce 
platform. Both the U.S. company's transaction transferring bulk 
personal financial data and the payment transactions by U.S. 
individuals are exempt transactions because they involve access by a 
covered person to bulk personal financial data, but are ordinarily 
incident to and part of a financial service.
    (2) Example 2. As ordinarily incident to and part of securitizing 
and selling asset-backed obligations (such as mortgage and nonmortgage 
loans) to a covered person, a U.S. bank provides bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data to the covered person. The data transfers are exempt 
transactions because they involve access by a covered person to bulk 
personal financial data, but are ordinarily incident to and part of a 
financial service.
    (3) Example 3. A U.S. bank or other financial institution, as 
ordinarily incident to and part of facilitating payments to U.S. 
persons in a country of concern, stores and processes the customers' 
bulk financial data using a data center operated by a third-party 
service provider in the country of concern. The use of this third-party 
service provider is a vendor agreement because it involves access by a 
covered person to personal financial data, but it is an exempt 
transaction that is ordinarily incident to and part of facilitating 
international payment.
    (4) Example 4. Same as Example 3, but the underlying payments are 
between U.S. persons in the United States and do not involve a country 
of concern. The use of this third-party service provider is a vendor 
agreement, but it is not an exempt transaction because it involves 
access by a covered person to bulk personal financial data and it is 
not ordinarily incident to facilitating this type of financial 
activity.
    (5) Example 5. As part of operating an online marketplace for the 
purchase and sale of goods, a U.S. company, as ordinarily incident to 
and part of U.S. consumers' purchase of goods on that marketplace, 
transfers bulk contact information, payment information (e.g., credit-
card account number, expiration data, and security code), and delivery 
address to a merchant in a country of concern. The data transfers are 
exempt transactions because they involve access by a covered person to 
bulk personal financial data, but they are ordinarily incident to and 
part of U.S. consumers' purchase of goods.
    (6) Example 6. A U.S. investment adviser purchases securities of a 
company incorporated in a country of concern for the accounts of its 
clients. The investment adviser engages a broker-dealer located in a 
country of concern to execute the trade, and, as ordinarily incident to 
and part of the transaction, transfers to the broker-dealer its 
clients' covered personal identifiers and financial account numbers in 
bulk. This provision of data is an exempt transaction because it 
involves access by a covered person to bulk personal financial data, 
but it is ordinarily incident to and part of the provision of 
investment-management services.
    (7) Example 7. A U.S. company that provides payment-processing 
services sells bulk U.S. sensitive personal data to a covered person. 
This sale is prohibited data brokerage and is not an exempt transaction 
because it involves access by a covered person to bulk personal 
financial data and is not ordinarily incident to and part of the 
payment-processing services provided by the U.S. company.
    (8) Example 8. A U.S. bank facilitates international funds 
transfers to foreign persons not related to a country of concern, but 
through intermediaries or locations subject to the jurisdiction or 
control of a country of concern. These transfers result in access to 
bulk financial records by some covered persons to complete the 
transfers and manage associated risks. Providing this access as part of 
these transfers is ordinarily incident to the provision of financial 
services and is exempt.
    (9) Example 9. A U.S. insurance company underwrites personal 
insurance to U.S. persons residing in foreign countries in the same 
region as a country of concern. The insurance company relies on its own 
business infrastructure and personnel in the country of concern to 
support its financial activity in the region, which results in access 
to the bulk U.S. sensitive personal data of some U.S.-person customers 
residing in the region, to covered persons at the insurance company 
supporting these activities. Providing this access is ordinarily 
incident to the provision of financial services and is exempt.
    (10) Example 10. A U.S. financial services provider operates a 
foreign branch in a country of concern and provides financial services 
to U.S. persons living within the country of concern. The financial 
services provider receives a lawful request from the regulator in the 
country of concern to review the financial activity conducted in the 
country, which includes providing access to the bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data of U.S. persons resident in the country or U.S. persons 
conducting transactions through the foreign branch. The financial 
services provider is also subject to ongoing and routine reporting 
requirements from various regulators in the country of concern. 
Responding to the regulator's request, including providing access to 
this bulk U.S. sensitive personal data, is ordinarily incident to the 
provision of financial services and is exempt.
    (11) Example 11. A U.S. bank voluntarily shares information, 
including relevant bulk U.S. sensitive personal data, with financial 
institutions organized under the laws of a country of concern for the 
purposes of, and consistent with industry practices for, fraud 
identification, combatting money laundering and terrorism financing, 
and U.S. sanctions compliance. Sharing this data for these purposes 
involves access by a covered person to bulk personal financial data, 
but is ordinarily incident to the provision of financial services and 
is exempt.
    (12) Example 12. A U.S. company provides wealth-management services 
and collects bulk personal financial data on its U.S. clients. The U.S. 
company appoints a citizen of a country of concern, who is located in a 
country of concern, to its board of directors. In connection with the 
board's data security and cybersecurity responsibilities, the director 
could compel company personnel or influence company policies or 
practices to provide the director access to the underlying bulk 
personal financial data the company collects on its U.S. clients. The 
appointment of the director, who is a covered person, is a restricted

[[Page 1722]]

employment agreement and is not exempt because the board member does 
not need to access, and in normal circumstances would not be able to 
access, the bulk financial data to perform his or her responsibilities. 
The board member's access to the bulk personal financial data is not 
ordinarily incident to the U.S. company's provision of wealth-
management services.


Sec.  202.506  Corporate group transactions.

    (a) Subparts C, D, J, and K (other than Sec.  202.1102 and Sec.  
202.1104) of this part do not apply to data transactions to the extent 
they are:
    (1) Between a U.S. person and its subsidiary or affiliate located 
in (or otherwise subject to the ownership, direction, jurisdiction, or 
control of) a country of concern; and
    (2) Ordinarily incident to and part of administrative or ancillary 
business operations, including:
    (i) Human resources;
    (ii) Payroll, expense monitoring and reimbursement, and other 
corporate financial activities;
    (iii) Paying business taxes or fees;
    (iv) Obtaining business permits or licenses;
    (v) Sharing data with auditors and law firms for regulatory 
compliance;
    (vi) Risk management;
    (vii) Business-related travel;
    (viii) Customer support;
    (ix) Employee benefits; and
    (x) Employees' internal and external communications.
    (b) Examples--(1) Example 1. A U.S. company has a foreign 
subsidiary located in a country of concern, and the U.S. company's 
U.S.-person contractors perform services for the foreign subsidiary. As 
ordinarily incident to and part of the foreign subsidiary's payments to 
the U.S.-person contractors for those services, the U.S. company 
engages in a data transaction that gives the subsidiary access to the 
U.S.-person contractors' bulk personal financial data and covered 
personal identifiers. This is an exempt corporate group transaction.
    (2) Example 2. A U.S. company aggregates bulk personal financial 
data. The U.S. company has a subsidiary that is a covered person 
because it is headquartered in a country of concern. The subsidiary is 
subject to the country of concern's national security laws requiring it 
to cooperate with and assist the country's intelligence services. The 
exemption for corporate group transactions would not apply to the U.S. 
parent's grant of a license to the subsidiary to access the parent's 
databases containing the bulk personal financial data for the purpose 
of complying with a request or order by the country of concern under 
those national security laws to provide access to that data because 
granting of such a license is not ordinarily incident to and part of 
administrative or ancillary business operations.
    (3) Example 3. A U.S. company's affiliate operates a manufacturing 
facility in a country of concern for one of the U.S. company's 
products. The affiliate uses employee fingerprints as part of security 
and identity verification to control access to that facility. To 
facilitate its U.S. employees' access to that facility as part of their 
job responsibilities, the U.S. company provides the fingerprints of 
those employees in bulk to its affiliate. The transaction is an exempt 
corporate group transaction.
    (4) Example 4. A U.S. company has a foreign subsidiary located in a 
country of concern that conducts research and development for the U.S. 
company. The U.S. company sends bulk personal financial data to the 
subsidiary for the purpose of developing a financial software tool. The 
transaction is not an exempt corporate group transaction because it is 
not ordinarily incident to and part of administrative or ancillary 
business operations.
    (5) Example 5. Same as Example 4, but the U.S. company has a 
foreign branch located in a country of concern instead of a foreign 
subsidiary. Because the foreign branch is a U.S. person as part of the 
U.S. company, the transaction occurs within the same U.S. person and is 
not subject to the prohibitions or restrictions. If the foreign branch 
allows employees who are covered persons to access the bulk personal 
financial data to develop the financial software tool, the foreign 
branch has engaged in restricted transactions.
    (6) Example 6. A U.S. financial services provider has a subsidiary 
located in a country of concern. Customers of the U.S. company conduct 
financial transactions in the country of concern, and customers of the 
foreign subsidiary conduct financial transactions in the United States. 
To perform customer service functions related to these financial 
transactions, the foreign subsidiary accesses bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data--specifically, personal financial data. The corporate 
group transactions exemption would apply to the foreign subsidiary's 
access to the personal financial data under these circumstances because 
it is ordinarily incident to and part of the provision of customer 
support. The foreign subsidiary's access to the personal financial data 
would also be covered by the financial services exemption.


Sec.  202.507  Transactions required or authorized by Federal law or 
international agreements, or necessary for compliance with Federal law.

    (a) Required or authorized by Federal law or international 
agreements. Subparts C, D, J, and K (other than Sec.  202.1102 and 
Sec.  202.1104) of this part do not apply to data transactions to the 
extent they are required or authorized by Federal law or pursuant to an 
international agreement to which the United States is a party, 
including relevant provisions in the following:
    (1) Annex 9 to the Convention on International Civil Aviation, 
International Civil Aviation Organization Doc. 7300 (2022);
    (2) Section 2 of the Convention on Facilitation of International 
Maritime Traffic (1965);
    (3) Articles 1, 12, 14, and 16 of the Postal Payment Services 
Agreement (2021);
    (4) Articles 63, 64, and 65 of the Constitution of the World Health 
Organization (1946);
    (5) Article 2 of the Agreement Between the Government of the United 
States of America and the Government of the People's Republic of China 
Regarding Mutual Assistance in Customs Matters (1999);
    (6) Article 7 of the Agreement Between the Government of the United 
States of America and the Government of the People's Republic of China 
on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters (2000);
    (7) Article 25 of the Agreement Between the Government of the 
United States of America and the Government of the People's Republic of 
China for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Tax 
Evasion with Respect to Taxes on Income (1987);
    (8) Article 2 of the Agreement Between the United States of America 
and the Macao Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of 
China for Cooperation to Facilitate the Implementation of FATCA (2021);
    (9) The Agreement between the Government of the United States and 
the Government of the People's Republic of China on Cooperation in 
Science and Technology (1979), as amended and extended;
    (10) Articles II, III, VII of the Protocol to Extend and Amend the 
Agreement Between the Department of Health and Human Services of the 
United States of America and the National Health and Family Planning 
Commission of the People's Republic of China for Cooperation in the 
Science and

[[Page 1723]]

Technology of Medicine and Public Health (2013);
    (11) Article III of the Treaty Between the United States and Cuba 
for the Mutual Extradition of Fugitives from Justice (1905);
    (12) Articles 3, 4, 5, 7 of the Agreement Between the Government of 
the United States of America and the Government of the Russian 
Federation on Cooperation and Mutual Assistance in Customs Matters 
(1994);
    (13) Articles 1, 2, 5, 7, 13, and 16 of the Treaty Between the 
United States of America and the Russian Federation on Mutual Legal 
Assistance in Criminal Matters (1999);
    (14) Articles I, IV, IX, XV, and XVI of the Treaty Between the 
Government of the United States of America and the Government of the 
Republic of Venezuela on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters 
(1997); and
    (15) Articles 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, 19, 35, and 45 of the International 
Health Regulations (2005).
    (b) Global health and pandemic preparedness. Subparts C and D of 
this part do not apply to data transactions to the extent they are 
required or authorized by the following:
    (1) The Pandemic Influenza Preparedness and Response Framework; and
    (2) The Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System.
    (c) Compliance with Federal law. Subparts C and D of this part do 
not apply to data transactions to the extent that they are ordinarily 
incident to and part of ensuring compliance with any Federal laws and 
regulations, including the Bank Secrecy Act, 12 U.S.C. 1829b, 1951 
through 1960, 31 U.S.C. 310, 5311 through 5314, 5316 through 5336; the 
Securities Act of 1933, 15 U.S.C. 77a et seq.; the Securities Exchange 
Act of 1934, 15 U.S.C. 78a et seq.; the Investment Company Act of 1940, 
15 U.S.C. 80a-1 et seq.; the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, 15 U.S.C. 
80b-1 et seq.; the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, 50 
U.S.C. 1701 et seq.; the Export Administration Regulations, 15 CFR 730 
et seq.; or any notes, guidance, orders, directives, or additional 
regulations related thereto.
    (d) Examples--(1) Example 1. A U.S. bank or other financial 
institution engages in a covered data transaction with a covered person 
that is ordinarily incident to and part of ensuring compliance with 
U.S. laws and regulations (such as OFAC sanctions and anti-money 
laundering programs required by the Bank Secrecy Act). This is an 
exempt transaction.
    (2) [Reserved]


Sec.  202.508  Investment agreements subject to a CFIUS action.

    (a) Exemption. Subparts C, D, J, and K (other than Sec.  202.1102 
and Sec.  202.1104) of this part do not apply to data transactions to 
the extent that they involve an investment agreement that is subject to 
a CFIUS action.
    (b) Examples--(1) Example 1. A U.S. software provider is acquired 
in a CFIUS covered transaction by a foreign entity in which the 
transaction parties sign a mitigation agreement with CFIUS. The 
agreement has provisions governing the acquirer's ability to access the 
data of the U.S. software provider and their customers. The mitigation 
agreement contains a provision stating that it is a CFIUS action for 
purposes of this part. Before the effective date of the CFIUS 
mitigation agreement, the investment agreement is not subject to a 
CFIUS action and remains subject to these regulations to the extent 
otherwise applicable. Beginning on the effective date of the CFIUS 
mitigation agreement, the investment agreement is subject to a CFIUS 
action and exempt from this part.
    (2) Example 2. Same as Example 1, but CFIUS issues an interim order 
before entering a mitigation agreement. The interim order states that 
it constitutes a CFIUS action for purposes of this part. Before the 
effective date of the interim order, the investment agreement is not 
subject to a CFIUS action and remains subject to these regulations to 
the extent otherwise applicable. Beginning on the effective date of the 
interim order, the investment agreement is subject to a CFIUS action 
and is exempt from this part. The mitigation agreement also states that 
it constitutes a CFIUS action for purposes of this part. After the 
effective date of the mitigation agreement, the investment agreement 
remains subject to a CFIUS action and is exempt from this part.
    (3) Example 3. A U.S. biotechnology company is acquired by a 
foreign multinational corporation. CFIUS reviews this acquisition and 
concludes action without mitigation. This acquisition is not subject to 
a CFIUS action, and the acquisition remains subject to this part to the 
extent otherwise applicable.
    (4) Example 4. A U.S. manufacturer is acquired by a foreign owner 
in which the transaction parties sign a mitigation agreement with 
CFIUS. The mitigation agreement provides for supply assurances and 
physical access restrictions but does not address data security, and it 
does not contain a provision explicitly designating that it is a CFIUS 
action. This acquisition is not subject to a CFIUS action, and the 
acquisition remains subject to this part to the extent otherwise 
applicable.
    (5) Example 5. As a result of CFIUS's review and investigation of a 
U.S. human genomic company's acquisition by a foreign healthcare 
company, CFIUS refers the transaction to the President with a 
recommendation to require the foreign acquirer to divest its interest 
in the U.S. company. The President issues an order prohibiting the 
transaction and requiring divestment of the foreign healthcare 
company's interests and rights in the human genomic company. The 
presidential order itself does not constitute a CFIUS action. Unless 
CFIUS takes action, such as by entering into an agreement or imposing 
conditions to address risk prior to completion of the divestment, the 
transaction remains subject to this part to the extent otherwise 
applicable for as long as the investment agreement remains in existence 
following the presidential order and prior to divestment.
    (6) Example 6. A U.S. healthcare company and foreign acquirer 
announce a transaction that they believe will be subject to CFIUS 
jurisdiction and disclose that they intend to file a joint voluntary 
notice soon. No CFIUS action has occurred yet, and the transaction 
remains subject to this part to the extent otherwise applicable.
    (7) Example 7. Same as Example 6, but the transaction parties file 
a joint voluntary notice with CFIUS. No CFIUS action has occurred yet, 
and the transaction remains subject to this part to the extent 
otherwise applicable.
    (8) Example 8. Company A, a covered person, acquires 100% of the 
equity and voting interest of Company B, a U.S. business that maintains 
bulk U.S. sensitive personal data of U.S. persons. After completing the 
transaction, the parties fail to implement the security requirements 
and other conditions required under this part. Company A and Company B 
later submit a joint voluntary notice to CFIUS with respect to the 
transaction. Upon accepting the notice, CFIUS determines that the 
transaction is a covered transaction and takes measures to mitigate 
interim risk that may arise as a result of the transaction until such 
time that the Committee has completed action, pursuant to 50 U.S.C. 
4565(l)(3)(A)(iii). The interim order states that it constitutes a 
CFIUS action for purposes of this part. Beginning on the effective date 
of these measures imposed by the interim order, the security 
requirements and other applicable conditions under this part no longer 
apply to the transaction. The Department of Justice, however, may take 
enforcement action under this part, in coordination with

[[Page 1724]]

CFIUS, with respect to the violations that occurred before the 
effective date of the interim order issued by CFIUS.
    (9) Example 9. Same as Example 8, but before engaging in the 
investment agreement for the acquisition, Company A and Company B 
submit the joint voluntary notice to CFIUS, CFIUS determines that the 
transaction is a CFIUS covered transaction, CFIUS identifies a risk 
related to data security arising from the transaction, and CFIUS 
negotiates and enters into a mitigation agreement with the parties to 
resolve that risk. The mitigation agreement contains a provision 
stating that it is a CFIUS action for purposes of this part. Because a 
CFIUS action has occurred before the parties engage in the investment 
agreement, the acquisition is exempt from this part.
    (10) Example 10. Same as Example 8, but before engaging in the 
investment agreement for the acquisition, the parties implement the 
security requirements and other conditions required under these 
regulations. Company A and Company B then submit a joint voluntary 
notice to CFIUS, which determines that the transaction is a CFIUS 
covered transaction. CFIUS identifies a risk related to data security 
arising from the transaction but determines that the regulations in 
this part adequately resolve the risk. CFIUS concludes action with 
respect to the transaction without taking any CFIUS action. Because no 
CFIUS action has occurred, the transaction remains subject to this 
part.
    (11) Example 11. Same facts as Example 10, but CFIUS determines 
that the security requirements and other conditions applicable under 
this part are inadequate to resolve the national security risk 
identified by CFIUS. CFIUS negotiates a mitigation agreement with the 
parties to resolve the risk, which contains a provision stating that it 
is a CFIUS action for purposes of this part. The transaction is exempt 
from this part beginning on the effective date of the CFIUS mitigation 
agreement.


Sec.  202.509  Telecommunications services.

    (a) Exemption. Subparts C, D, J, and K (other than Sec.  202.1102 
and Sec.  202.1104) of this part do not apply to data transactions, 
other than those involving data brokerage, to the extent that they are 
ordinarily incident to and part of the provision of telecommunications 
services.
    (b) Examples--(1) Example 1. A U.S. telecommunications service 
provider collects covered personal identifiers from its U.S. 
subscribers. Some of those subscribers travel to a country of concern 
and use their mobile phone service under an international roaming 
agreement. The local telecommunications service provider in the country 
of concern shares these covered personal identifiers with the U.S. 
service provider for the purposes of either helping provision service 
to the U.S. subscriber or receiving payment for the U.S. subscriber's 
use of the country of concern service provider's network under that 
international roaming agreement. The U.S. service provider provides the 
country of concern service provider with network or device information 
for the purpose of provisioning services and obtaining payment for its 
subscribers' use of the local telecommunications service provider's 
network. Over the course of 12 months, the volume of network or device 
information shared by the U.S. service provider with the country of 
concern service provider for the purpose of provisioning services 
exceeds the applicable bulk threshold. These transfers of bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data are ordinarily incident to and part of the 
provision of telecommunications services and are thus exempt 
transactions.
    (2) Example 2. A U.S. telecommunications service provider collects 
precise geolocation data on its U.S. subscribers. The U.S. 
telecommunications service provider sells this precise geolocation data 
in bulk to a covered person for the purpose of targeted advertising. 
This sale is not ordinarily incident to and part of the provision of 
telecommunications services and remains a prohibited transaction.


Sec.  202.510  Drug, biological product, and medical device 
authorizations.

    (a) Exemption. Except as specified in paragraph (a)(2) of this 
section, subparts C, D, J, and K (other than Sec.  202.1102 and Sec.  
202.1104) of this part do not apply to a data transaction that
    (1) Involves ``regulatory approval data'' as defined in paragraph 
(b) of this section and
    (2) Is necessary to obtain or maintain regulatory authorization or 
approval to research or market a drug, biological product, device, or a 
combination product, provided that the U.S. person complies with the 
recordkeeping and reporting requirements set forth in Sec. Sec.  
202.1101(a) and 202.1102 with respect to such transaction.
    (b) Regulatory approval data. For purposes of this section, the 
term regulatory approval data means sensitive personal data that is de-
identified or pseudonymized consistent with the standards of 21 CFR 
314.80 and that is required to be submitted to a regulatory entity, or 
is required by a regulatory entity to be submitted to a covered person, 
to obtain or maintain authorization or approval to research or market a 
drug, biological product, device, or combination product, including in 
relation to post-marketing studies and post-marketing product 
surveillance activities, and supplemental product applications for 
additional uses. The term excludes sensitive personal data not 
reasonably necessary for a regulatory entity to assess the safety and 
effectiveness of the drug, biological product, device, or combination 
product.
    (c) Other terms. For purposes of this section, the terms ``drug,'' 
``biological product,'' ``device,'' and ``combination product'' have 
the meanings given to them in 21 U.S.C. 321(g)(1), 42 U.S.C. 262(i)(1), 
21 U.S.C. 321(h)(1), and 21 CFR 3.2(e), respectively.
    (d) Examples--(1) Example 1. A U.S. pharmaceutical company seeks to 
market a new drug in a country of concern. The company submits a 
marketing application to the regulatory entity in the country of 
concern with authority to approve the drug in the country of concern. 
The marketing application includes the safety and effectiveness data 
reasonably necessary to obtain regulatory approval in that country. The 
transfer of data to the country of concern's regulatory entity is 
exempt from the prohibitions in this part.
    (2) Example 2. Same as Example 1, except the regulatory entity in 
the country of concern requires that the data be de-anonymized. The 
transfer of data is not exempt under this section, because the data 
includes sensitive personal data that is identified to an individual.
    (3) Example 3. Same as Example 1, except country of concern law 
requires foreign pharmaceutical companies to submit regulatory approval 
data using (1) a registered agent who primarily resides in the country 
of concern, (2) a country of concern incorporated subsidiary, or (3) an 
employee located in a country of concern. The U.S. pharmaceutical 
company enters into a vendor agreement with a registered agent in the 
country of concern to submit the regulatory approval data to the 
country of concern regulator. The U.S. pharmaceutical company provides 
to the registered agent only the regulatory approval data the U.S. 
pharmaceutical company intends the registered agent to submit to the 
country of concern regulator. The transaction with the registered agent 
is exempt, because it is necessary to obtain approval to market the 
drug in a country

[[Page 1725]]

of concern. The U.S. pharmaceutical company must comply with the 
recordkeeping and reporting requirements set forth in Sec. Sec.  
202.1101(a) and 202.1102 with respect to such transaction, however.
    (4) Example 4. Same as Example 1, except the U.S. company enters a 
vendor agreement with a covered person located in the country of 
concern to store and organize the bulk U.S. sensitive personal data for 
eventual submission to the country of concern regulator. Country of 
concern law does not require foreign pharmaceutical companies to enter 
into such vendor agreements. The transaction is not exempt under this 
section, because the use of a covered person to store and organize the 
bulk U.S. sensitive personal data for the company's regulatory 
submission is not necessary to obtain regulatory approval.
    (5) Example 5. A U.S. pharmaceutical company has obtained 
regulatory approval to market a new drug in a country of concern. The 
country of concern regulator requires the U.S. pharmaceutical company 
to submit de-identified sensitive personal data collected as part of 
the company's post-marketing product surveillance activities to assess 
the safety and efficacy of the drug to the country of concern regulator 
via a country of concern registered agent to maintain the U.S. 
pharmaceutical company's authorization to market the drug. Sharing the 
de-identified sensitive personal data with the country of concern 
regulator via the country of concern registered agent to maintain 
marketing authorization is exempt from the prohibitions and 
restrictions in subparts C and D of this part.
    (6) Example 6. A U.S. medical device manufacturer provides de-
identified bulk U.S. personal health data to a country of concern 
regulator to obtain authorization to research the safety and 
effectiveness of a medical device in the country of concern. Country of 
concern law requires medical device manufacturers to conduct such 
safety research to obtain regulatory approval to market a new device. 
The prohibitions and restrictions of subparts C and D of this part do 
not apply to the de-identified regulatory approval data submitted to 
the country of concern regulator to obtain authorization to research 
the device's safety and effectiveness.


Sec.  202.511  Other clinical investigations and post-marketing 
surveillance data.

    (a) Exemption. Subparts C, D, J, and K (other than Sec.  202.1102 
and Sec.  202.1104) of this part do not apply to data transactions to 
the extent that those transactions are:
    (1) Ordinarily incident to and part of clinical investigations 
regulated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (``FDA'') under 
sections 505(i) and 520(g) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act 
(``FD&C Act'') or clinical investigations that support applications to 
the FDA for research or marketing permits for drugs, biological 
products, devices, combination products, or infant formula; or
    (2) Ordinarily incident to and part of the collection or processing 
of clinical care data indicating real-world performance or safety of 
products, or the collection or processing of post-marketing 
surveillance data (including pharmacovigilance and post-marketing 
safety monitoring), and necessary to support or maintain authorization 
by the FDA, provided the data is de-identified or pseudonymized 
consistent with the standards of 21 CFR 314.80.
    (b) Other terms. For purposes of this section, the terms ``drug,'' 
``biological product,'' ``device,'' ``combination product,'' and 
``infant formula'' have the meanings given to them in 21 U.S.C. 
321(g)(1), 42 U.S.C. 262(i)(1), 21 U.S.C. 321(h)(1), 21 CFR 3.2(e), and 
21 U.S.C. 321(z) respectively.

Subpart F--Determination of Countries of Concern


Sec.  202.601  Determination of countries of concern.

    (a) Countries of concern. Solely for purposes of the Order and this 
part, the Attorney General has determined, with the concurrence of the 
Secretaries of State and Commerce, that the following foreign 
governments have engaged in a long-term pattern or serious instances of 
conduct significantly adverse to the national security of the United 
States or security and safety of U.S. persons and pose a significant 
risk of exploiting government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data to the detriment of the national security of the United 
States or security and safety of U.S. persons:
    (1) China;
    (2) Cuba;
    (3) Iran;
    (4) North Korea;
    (5) Russia; and
    (6) Venezuela.
    (b) Effective date of amendments. Any amendment to the list of 
countries of concern will apply to any covered data transaction that is 
initiated, pending, or completed on or after the effective date of the 
amendment.

Subpart G--Covered Persons


Sec.  202.701  Designation of covered persons.

    (a) Designations. The Attorney General may designate any person as 
a covered person for purposes of this part if, after consultation with 
the Department of State and any other agencies as the Attorney General 
deems appropriate, the Attorney General determines the person meets any 
of the criteria set forth in Sec.  202.211(a)(5) of this part.
    (b) Information considered. In determining whether to designate a 
person as a covered person, the Attorney General may consider any 
information or material the Attorney General deems relevant and 
appropriate, classified or unclassified, from any Federal department or 
agency or from any other source.
    (c) Covered Persons List. The names of persons designated as a 
covered person for purposes of this part, transactions with whom are 
prohibited or restricted pursuant to this part, are published in the 
Federal Register and incorporated into the National Security Division's 
Covered Persons List. The Covered Persons List is accessible through 
the following page on the National Security Division's website at 
https://www.justice.gov/nsd.
    (d) Non-exhaustive. The list of designated covered persons 
described in this section is not exhaustive of all covered persons and 
supplements the categories in the definition of covered persons in 
Sec.  202.211.
    (e) Effective date; actual and constructive knowledge. (1) 
Designation as a covered person will be effective from the date of any 
public announcement by the Department. Except as otherwise authorized 
in this part, a U.S. person with actual knowledge of a designated 
person's status is prohibited from knowingly engaging in a covered data 
transaction with that person on or after the date of the Department's 
public announcement.
    (2) Publication in the Federal Register is deemed to provide 
constructive knowledge of a person's status as a covered person.


Sec.  202.702  Procedures governing removal from the Covered Persons 
List.

    (a) Requests for removal from the Covered Persons List. A person 
may petition to seek administrative reconsideration of their 
designation, or may assert that the circumstances resulting in the 
designation no longer apply, and thus seek to be removed from the 
Covered Persons List pursuant to the following administrative 
procedures:

[[Page 1726]]

    (b) Content of requests. A covered person designated under 
paragraph (a) of this section may submit arguments or evidence that the 
person believes establish that insufficient basis exists for the 
designation. Such a person also may propose remedial steps on the 
person's part, such as corporate reorganization, resignation of persons 
from positions in a listed entity, or similar steps, that the person 
believes would negate the basis for designation.
    (c) Additional content; form and method of submission. Requests for 
removal from the Covered Persons List must be submitted in accordance 
with this section and with subpart L of this part.
    (d) Requests for more information. The information submitted by the 
listed person seeking removal will be reviewed by the Attorney General, 
who may request clarifying, corroborating, or other additional 
information.
    (e) Meetings. A person seeking removal may request a meeting with 
the Attorney General; however, such meetings are not required, and the 
Attorney General may, in the Attorney General's discretion, decline to 
conduct such a meeting prior to completing a review pursuant to this 
section.
    (f) Decisions. After the Attorney General has conducted a review of 
the request for removal, and after consultation with other agencies as 
the Attorney General deems appropriate, the Attorney General will 
provide a written decision to the person seeking removal. A covered 
person's status as a covered person--including its associated 
prohibitions and restrictions under this part--remains in effect during 
the pendency of any request to be removed from the Covered Persons 
List.

Subpart H--Licensing


Sec.  202.801  General licenses.

    (a) General course of procedure. The Department may, as 
appropriate, issue general licenses to authorize, under appropriate 
terms and conditions, transactions that are subject to the prohibitions 
or restrictions in this part. In determining whether to issue a general 
license, the Attorney General may consider any information or material 
the Attorney General deems relevant and appropriate, classified or 
unclassified, from any Federal department or agency or from any other 
source.
    (b) Relationship with specific licenses. It is the policy of the 
Department not to grant applications for specific licenses authorizing 
transactions to which the provisions of a general license are 
applicable.
    (c) Reports. Persons availing themselves of certain general 
licenses may be required to file reports and statements in accordance 
with the instructions specified in those licenses, this part or the 
Order. Failure to file timely all required information in such reports 
or statements may nullify the authorization otherwise provided by the 
general license and result in apparent violations of the applicable 
prohibitions that may be subject to enforcement action.


Sec.  202.802  Specific licenses.

    (a) General course of procedure. Transactions subject to the 
prohibitions or restrictions in this part or the Order, and that are 
not otherwise permitted under this part or a general license, may be 
permitted only under a specific license, under appropriate terms and 
conditions.
    (b) Content of applications for specific licenses. Applications for 
specific licenses shall include, at a minimum, a description of the 
nature of the transaction, including each of the following 
requirements:
    (1) The types and volumes of government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data involved in the transactions;
    (2) The identity of the transaction parties, including any 
ownership of entities or citizenship or primary residence of 
individuals;
    (3) The end-use of the data and the method of data transfer; and
    (4) Any other information that the Attorney General may require.
    (c) Additional content; form and method of submissions. Requests 
for specific licenses must be submitted in accordance with this section 
and with subpart L of this part.
    (d) Additional conditions. Applicants should submit only one copy 
of a specific license application to the Department; submitting 
multiple copies may result in processing delays. Any person having an 
interest in a transaction or proposed transaction may file an 
application for a specific license authorizing such a transaction.
    (e) Further information to be supplied. Applicants may be required 
to furnish such further information as the Department deems necessary 
to assist in making a determination. Any applicant or other party-in-
interest desiring to present additional information concerning a 
specific license application may do so at any time before or after the 
Department makes its decision with respect to the application. In 
unique circumstances, the Department may determine, in its discretion, 
that an oral presentation regarding a license application would assist 
in the Department's review of the issues involved. Any requests to make 
such an oral presentation must be submitted electronically by emailing 
the National Security Division at NSD.FIRS.datasecurity@usdoj.gov or 
using another official method to make such requests, in accordance with 
any instructions on the National Security Division's website.
    (f) Decisions. In determining whether to issue a specific license, 
the Attorney General may consider any information or material the 
Attorney General deems relevant and appropriate, classified or 
unclassified, from any Federal department or agency or from any other 
source. The Department will advise each applicant of the decision 
respecting the applicant's filed application. The Department's decision 
with respect to a license application shall constitute final agency 
action.
    (g) Time to issuance. The Department shall endeavor to respond to 
any request for a specific license within 45 days after receipt of the 
request and of any requested additional information and documents.
    (h) Scope. (1) Unless otherwise specified in the license, a 
specific license authorizes the transaction:
    (i) Only between the parties identified in the license;
    (ii) Only with respect to the data described in the license; and
    (iii) Only to the extent the conditions specified in the license 
are satisfied. The applicant must inform any other parties identified 
in the license of the license's scope and of the specific conditions 
applicable to them.
    (2) The Department will determine whether to grant specific 
licenses in reliance on representations the applicant made or submitted 
in connection with the license application, letters of explanation, and 
other documents submitted. Any license obtained based on a false or 
misleading representation in the license application, in any document 
submitted in connection with the license application, or during an oral 
presentation under this section shall be deemed void as of the date of 
issuance.
    (i) Reports under specific licenses. As a condition for the 
issuance of any specific license, the licensee may be required to file 
reports or statements with respect to the transaction or transactions 
authorized by the specific license in such form and at such times as 
may be prescribed in the license. Failure to file timely all required 
information in such reports or

[[Page 1727]]

statements may nullify the authorization otherwise provided by the 
specific license and result in apparent violations of the applicable 
prohibitions that may be subject to enforcement action.
    (j) Effect of denial. The denial of a specific license does not 
preclude the reconsideration of an application or the filing of a 
further application. The applicant or any other party-in-interest may 
at any time request, by written correspondence, reconsideration of the 
denial of an application based on new facts or changed circumstances.


Sec.  202.803  General provisions.

    (a) Effect of license. (1) No license issued under this subpart H, 
or otherwise issued by the Department, authorizes or validates any 
transaction effected prior to the issuance of such license or other 
authorization, unless specifically provided for in such license or 
authorization.
    (2) No license issued under this subpart H authorizes or validates 
any transaction prohibited under or subject to this part unless the 
license is properly issued by the Department and specifically refers to 
this part.
    (3) Any license authorizing or validating any transaction that is 
prohibited under or otherwise subject to this part has the effect of 
removing or amending those prohibitions or other requirements from the 
transaction, but only to the extent specifically stated by the terms of 
the license. Unless the license otherwise specifies, such an 
authorization does not create any right, duty, obligation, claim, or 
interest in, or with respect to, any property that would not otherwise 
exist under ordinary principles of law.
    (4) Nothing contained in this part shall be construed to supersede 
the requirements established under any other provision of law or to 
relieve a person from any requirement to obtain a license or 
authorization from another department or agency of the United States 
Government in compliance with applicable laws and regulations subject 
to the jurisdiction of that department or agency. For example, issuance 
of a specific license authorizing a transaction otherwise prohibited by 
this part does not operate as a license or authorization to conclude 
the transaction that is otherwise required from the U.S. Department of 
Commerce, U.S. Department of State, U.S. Department of the Treasury, or 
any other department or agency of the United States Government.
    (b) Amendment, modification, or rescission. Except as otherwise 
provided by law, any licenses (whether general or specific), 
authorizations, instructions, or forms issued thereunder may be 
amended, modified, or rescinded at any time.
    (c) Consultation. The Department will issue, amend, modify, or 
rescind a general or specific license in concurrence with the 
Departments of State, Commerce, and Homeland Security and in 
consultation with other relevant agencies.
    (d) Exclusion from licenses and other authorizations. The Attorney 
General reserves the right to exclude any person, property, or 
transaction from the operation of any license or from the privileges 
conferred by any license. The Attorney General also reserves the right 
to restrict the applicability of any license to particular persons, 
property, transactions, or classes thereof. Such actions are binding 
upon all persons receiving actual or constructive notice of the 
exclusions or restrictions.

Subpart I--Advisory Opinions


Sec.  202.901  Inquiries concerning application of this part.

    (a) General. Any U.S. person party to a transaction potentially 
regulated under the Order and this part, or an agent of the party to 
such a transaction on the party's behalf, may request from the Attorney 
General a statement of the present enforcement intentions of the 
Department of Justice under the Order with respect to that transaction 
that may be subject to the prohibitions or restrictions in the Order 
and this part (``advisory opinion'').
    (b) Anonymous, hypothetical, non-party and ex post facto review 
requests excluded. The entire transaction that is the subject of the 
advisory opinion request must be an actual, as opposed to hypothetical, 
transaction and involve disclosed, as opposed to anonymous, parties to 
the transaction. Advisory opinion requests must be submitted by a U.S. 
person party to the transaction or that party's agent and have no 
application to a party that does not join the request. The transaction 
need not involve only prospective conduct, but an advisory opinion 
request will not be considered unless that portion of the transaction 
for which an opinion is sought involves only prospective conduct.
    (c) Contents. Each advisory opinion request shall be specific and 
must be accompanied by all material information bearing on the conduct 
for which an advisory opinion is requested, and on the circumstances of 
the prospective conduct, including background information, complete 
copies of any and all operative documents, and detailed statements of 
all collateral or oral understandings, if any. Each request must 
include, at a minimum:
    (1) The identities of the transaction parties, including any 
ownership of entities or citizenship or primary residence of 
individuals;
    (2) A description of the nature of the transaction, including the 
types and volumes of government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive 
personal data involved in the transaction, the end-use of the data, the 
method of data transfer, and any restrictions or requirements related 
to a party's right or ability to control, access, disseminate, or 
dispose of the data; and
    (3) Any potential basis for exempting or excluding the transaction 
from the prohibitions or restrictions imposed in the Order and this 
part.
    (d) Additional contents; format and method of submissions. Requests 
for advisory opinions must be submitted in accordance with this section 
and with subpart L of this part.
    (e) Further information to be supplied. Each party shall provide 
any additional information or documents that the Department of Justice 
may thereafter request in its review of the matter. Any information 
furnished orally shall be confirmed promptly in writing; signed by or 
on behalf of the party that submitted the initial review request; and 
certified to be a true, correct, and complete disclosure of the 
requested information. A request will not be deemed complete until the 
Department of Justice receives such additional information. In 
connection with an advisory opinion request, the Department of Justice 
may conduct any independent investigation it believes appropriate.
    (f) Outcomes. After submission of an advisory opinion request, the 
Department, in its discretion, may state its present enforcement 
intention under the Order and this part with respect to the proposed 
conduct; may decline to state its present enforcement intention; or, if 
circumstances warrant, may take such other position or initiate such 
other action as it considers appropriate. Any requesting party or 
parties may withdraw a request at any time prior to issuance of an 
advisory opinion. The Department remains free, however, to submit such 
comments to the requesting party or parties as it deems appropriate. 
Failure to take action after receipt of a request, documents, or 
information, whether submitted pursuant to this procedure or otherwise, 
shall not in any way limit or stop the Department from taking any 
action at such time thereafter as it deems appropriate. The Department 
reserves the right to retain

[[Page 1728]]

any advisory opinion request, document, or information submitted to it 
under this procedure or otherwise, to disclose any advisory opinion and 
advisory opinion request, including the identities of the requesting 
party and foreign parties to the transaction, the general nature and 
circumstances of the proposed conduct, and the action of the Department 
in response to any advisory opinion request, consistent with applicable 
law, and to use any such request, document, or information for any 
governmental purpose.
    (g) Time for response. The Department shall endeavor to respond to 
any advisory opinion request within 30 days after receipt of the 
request and of any requested additional information and documents.
    (h) Written decisions only. The requesting party or parties may 
rely only upon a written advisory opinion signed by the Attorney 
General.
    (i) Effect of advisory opinion. Each advisory opinion can be relied 
upon by the requesting party or parties to the extent the disclosures 
made pursuant to this subpart I were accurate and complete and to the 
extent the disclosures continue accurately and completely to reflect 
circumstances after the date of the issuance of the advisory opinion. 
An advisory opinion will not restrict enforcement actions by any agency 
other than the Department of Justice. It will not affect a requesting 
party's obligations to any other agency or under any statutory or 
regulatory provision other than those specifically discussed in the 
advisory opinion.
    (j) Amendment or revocation of advisory opinion. An advisory 
opinion may be amended or revoked at any time after it has been issued. 
Notice of such will be given in the same manner as notice of the 
advisory opinion was originally given or in the Federal Register. 
Whenever possible, a notice of amendment or revocation will state when 
the Department will consider a party's reliance on the superseded 
advisory opinion to be unreasonable, and any transition period that may 
be applicable.
    (k) Compliance. Neither the submission of an advisory opinion 
request, nor its pendency, shall in any way alter the responsibility or 
obligation of a requesting party to comply with the Order, this part, 
or any other applicable law.

Subpart J--Due Diligence and Audit Requirements


Sec.  202.1001  Due diligence for restricted transactions.

    (a) Data compliance program. By no later than October 6, 2025, U.S. 
persons engaging in any restricted transactions shall develop and 
implement a data compliance program.
    (b) Requirements. The data compliance program shall include, at a 
minimum, each of the following requirements:
    (1) Risk-based procedures for verifying data flows involved in any 
restricted transaction, including procedures to verify and log, in an 
auditable manner, the following:
    (i) The types and volumes of government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data involved in the transaction;
    (ii) The identity of the transaction parties, including any 
ownership of entities or citizenship or primary residence of 
individuals; and
    (iii) The end-use of the data and the method of data transfer;
    (2) For restricted transactions that involve vendors, risk-based 
procedures for verifying the identity of vendors;
    (3) A written policy that describes the data compliance program and 
that is annually certified by an officer, executive, or other employee 
responsible for compliance;
    (4) A written policy that describes the implementation of the 
security requirements as defined in Sec.  202.248 and that is annually 
certified by an officer, executive, or other employee responsible for 
compliance; and
    (5) Any other information that the Attorney General may require.


Sec.  202.1002  Audits for restricted transactions.

    (a) Audit required. U.S. persons that, on or after October 6, 2025, 
engage in any restricted transactions under Sec.  202.401 shall conduct 
an audit that complies with the requirements of this section.
    (b) Who may conduct the audit. The auditor:
    (1) Must be qualified and competent to examine, verify, and attest 
to the U.S. person's compliance with and the effectiveness of the 
security requirements, as defined in Sec.  202.248, and all other 
applicable requirements, as defined in Sec.  202.401, implemented for 
restricted transactions;
    (2) Must be independent; and
    (3) Cannot be a covered person or a country of concern.
    (c) When required. The audit must be performed once for each 
calendar year in which the U.S. person engages in any restricted 
transactions.
    (d) Timeframe. The audit must cover the preceding 12 months.
    (e) Scope. The audit must:
    (1) Examine the U.S. person's restricted transactions;
    (2) Examine the U.S. person's data compliance program required 
under Sec.  202.1001 and its implementation;
    (3) Examine relevant records required under Sec.  202.1101;
    (4) Examine the U.S. person's security requirements, as defined by 
Sec.  202.248; and
    (5) Use a reliable methodology to conduct the audit.
    (f) Report. (1) The auditor must prepare and submit a written 
report to the U.S. person within 60 days of the completion of the 
audit.
    (2) The audit report must:
    (i) Describe the nature of any restricted transactions engaged in 
by the U.S. person;
    (ii) Describe the methodology undertaken, including the relevant 
policies and other documents reviewed, relevant personnel interviewed, 
and any relevant facilities, equipment, networks, or systems examined;
    (iii) Describe the effectiveness of the U.S. person's data 
compliance program and its implementation;
    (iv) Describe any vulnerabilities or deficiencies in the 
implementation of the security requirements that have affected or could 
affect the risk of access to government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data by a country of concern or covered person;
    (v) Describe any instances in which the security requirements 
failed or were otherwise not effective in mitigating the risk of access 
to government-related data or bulk U.S. sensitive personal data by a 
country of concern or covered person; and
    (vi) Recommend any improvements or changes to policies, practices, 
or other aspects of the U.S. person's business to ensure compliance 
with the security requirements.
    (3) U.S. persons engaged in restricted transactions must retain the 
audit report for a period of at least 10 years, consistent with the 
recordkeeping requirements in Sec.  202.1101.

Subpart K--Reporting and Recordkeeping Requirements


Sec.  202.1101  Records and recordkeeping requirements.

    (a) Records. Except as otherwise provided, U.S. persons engaging in 
any transaction subject to the provisions of this part shall keep a 
full and accurate record of each such transaction engaged

[[Page 1729]]

in, and such record shall be available for examination for at least 10 
years after the date of such transaction.
    (b) Additional recordkeeping requirements. U.S. persons engaging in 
any restricted transaction shall create and maintain, at a minimum, the 
following records in an auditable manner:
    (1) A written policy that describes the data compliance program and 
that is certified annually by an officer, executive, or other employee 
responsible for compliance;
    (2) A written policy that describes the implementation of any 
applicable security requirements as defined in Sec.  202.248 and that 
is certified annually by an officer, executive, or other employee 
responsible for compliance;
    (3) The results of any annual audits that verify the U.S. person's 
compliance with the security requirements and any conditions on a 
license;
    (4) Documentation of the due diligence conducted to verify the data 
flow involved in any restricted transaction, including:
    (i) The types and volumes of government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data involved in the transaction;
    (ii) The identity of the transaction parties, including any direct 
and indirect ownership of entities or citizenship or primary residence 
of individuals; and
    (iii) A description of the end-use of the data;
    (5) Documentation of the method of data transfer;
    (6) Documentation of the dates the transaction began and ended;
    (7) Copies of any agreements associated with the transaction;
    (8) Copies of any relevant licenses or advisory opinions;
    (9) The document reference number for any original document issued 
by the Attorney General, such as a license or advisory opinion;
    (10) A copy of any relevant documentation received or created in 
connection with the transaction; and
    (11) An annual certification by an officer, executive, or other 
employee responsible for compliance of the completeness and accuracy of 
the records documenting due diligence.


Sec.  202.1102  Reports to be furnished on demand.

    (a) Reports. Every person is required to furnish under oath, in the 
form of reports or otherwise, from time to time and at any time as may 
be required by the Department of Justice, complete information relative 
to any act or transaction or covered data transaction, regardless of 
whether such act, transaction, or covered data transaction is effected 
pursuant to a license or otherwise, subject to the provisions of this 
part and except as otherwise prohibited by Federal law. The Department 
of Justice may require that such reports include the production of any 
books, contracts, letters, papers, or other hard copy or electronic 
documents relating to any such act, transaction, or covered data 
transaction, in the custody or control of the persons required to make 
such reports. Reports may be required either before, during, or after 
such acts, transactions, or covered data transactions. The Department 
of Justice may, through any person or agency, conduct investigations, 
hold hearings, administer oaths, examine witnesses, receive evidence, 
take depositions, and require by subpoena the attendance and testimony 
of witnesses and the production of any books, contracts, letters, 
papers, and other hard copy or electronic documents relating to any 
matter under investigation, regardless of whether any report has been 
required or filed in connection therewith.
    (b) Definition of the term ``document.'' For purposes of paragraph 
(a) of this section, the term document includes any written, recorded, 
or graphic matter or other means of preserving thought or expression 
(including in electronic format), and all tangible things stored in any 
medium from which information can be processed, transcribed, or 
obtained directly or indirectly, including correspondence, memoranda, 
notes, messages, contemporaneous communications such as text and 
instant messages, letters, emails, spreadsheets, metadata, contracts, 
bulletins, diaries, chronological data, minutes, books, reports, 
examinations, charts, ledgers, books of account, invoices, air 
waybills, bills of lading, worksheets, receipts, printouts, papers, 
schedules, affidavits, presentations, transcripts, surveys, graphic 
representations of any kind, drawings, photographs, graphs, video or 
sound recordings, and motion pictures or other film.
    (c) Format. Persons providing documents to the Department of 
Justice pursuant to this section must produce documents in a usable 
format agreed upon by the Department of Justice. For guidance, see the 
Department of Justice's data delivery standards available on the 
National Security Division's website at https://www.justice.gov/nsd.


Sec.  202.1103  Annual reports.

    (a) Who must report. An annual report must be filed, except as 
otherwise prohibited by Federal law, by any U.S. person that, on or 
after October 6, 2025, is engaged in a restricted transaction involving 
cloud-computing services, and that has 25% or more of the U.S. person's 
equity interests owned (directly or indirectly, through any contract, 
arrangement, understanding, relationship, or otherwise) by a country of 
concern or covered person.
    (b) Primary responsibility to report. A report may be filed on 
behalf of a U.S. person engaging in the data transaction described in 
Sec.  202.1103(a) by an attorney, agent, or other person. Primary 
responsibility for reporting, however, rests with the actual U.S. 
person engaging in the data transaction. No U.S. person is excused from 
filing a report by reason of the fact that another U.S. person has 
submitted a report with regard to the same data transaction, except 
where the U.S. person has actual knowledge that the other U.S. person 
filed the report.
    (c) When reports are due. A report on the data transactions 
described in Sec.  202.1103(a) engaged in as of December 31 of the 
previous year shall be filed annually by March 1 of the subsequent 
year.
    (d) Contents of reports. Annual reports on the data transactions 
described in Sec.  202.1103(a) shall include the following:
    (1) The name and address of the U.S. person engaging in the covered 
data transaction, and the name, telephone number, and email address of 
a contact from whom additional information may be obtained;
    (2) A description of the covered data transaction, including:
    (i) The date of the transaction;
    (ii) The types and volumes of government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data involved in the transaction;
    (iii) The method of data transfer; and
    (iv) Any persons participating in the data transaction and their 
respective locations, including the name and location of each data 
recipient, the ownership of entities or citizenship or primary 
residence of individuals, the name and location of any covered persons 
involved in the transaction, and the name of any countries of concern 
involved in the transaction;
    (3) A copy of any relevant documentation received or created in 
connection with the transaction; and
    (4) Any other information that the Department of Justice may 
require.
    (e) Additional contents; format and method of submission. Reports 
required by this section must be submitted in accordance with this 
section and with subpart L of this part.

[[Page 1730]]

Sec.  202.1104  Reports on rejected prohibited transactions.

    (a) Who must report. A report must be filed, except as otherwise 
prohibited by Federal law, by any U.S. person that, on or after October 
6, 2025, has received and affirmatively rejected (including 
automatically rejected using software, technology, or automated tools) 
an offer from another person to engage in a prohibited transaction 
involving data brokerage.
    (b) When reports are due. U.S. persons shall file reports within 14 
days of rejecting a transaction prohibited by this part.
    (c) Contents of reports. Reports on rejected transactions shall 
include the following, to the extent known and available to the person 
filing the report at the time the transaction is rejected:
    (1) The name and address of the U.S. person that rejected the 
prohibited transaction, and the name, telephone number, and email 
address of a contact from whom additional information may be obtained;
    (2) A description of the rejected transaction, including:
    (i) The date the transaction was rejected;
    (ii) The types and volumes of government-related data or bulk U.S. 
sensitive personal data involved in the transaction;
    (iii) The method of data transfer;
    (iv) Any persons attempting to participate in the transaction and 
their respective locations, including the name and location of each 
data recipient, the ownership of entities or citizenship or primary 
residence of individuals, the name and location of any covered persons 
involved in the transaction, and the name of any countries of concern 
involved in the transaction;
    (v) A copy of any relevant documentation received or created in 
connection with the transaction; and
    (vi) Any other information that the Department of Justice may 
require.
    (d) Additional contents; format and method of submission. Reports 
required by this section must be submitted in accordance with this 
section and with subpart L of this part.

Subpart L--Submitting Applications, Requests, Reports, and 
Responses


Sec.  202.1201  Procedures.

    (a) Application of this subpart. This subpart L applies to any 
submissions required or permitted by this part, including reports of 
known or suspected violations submitted pursuant to Sec.  202.302, 
requests for removal from the Covered Persons List submitted pursuant 
to subpart G of this part, requests for specific licenses submitted 
pursuant to Sec.  202.802, advisory opinion requests submitted pursuant 
to subpart I of this part, annual reports submitted pursuant to Sec.  
202.1103, reports on rejected prohibited transactions submitted 
pursuant to Sec.  202.1104, and responses to pre-penalty notices and 
findings of violations submitted pursuant to Sec.  202.1306 
(collectively, ``submissions'').
    (b) Form of submissions. Submissions must follow the instructions 
in this part and any instructions on the National Security Division's 
website. With the exception of responses to pre-penalty notices or 
findings of violations submitted pursuant to subpart M of this part, 
submissions must use the forms on the National Security Division's 
website or another official reporting option as specified by the 
National Security Division.
    (c) Method of submissions. Submissions must be made to the National 
Security Division electronically by emailing the National Security 
Division at NSD.FIRS.datasecurity@usdoj.gov or using another official 
electronic reporting option, in accordance with any instructions on the 
National Security Division's website.
    (d) Certification. If the submitting party is an individual, the 
submission must be signed by the individual or the individual's 
attorney. If the submitting party is not an individual, the submission 
must be signed on behalf of each submitting party by an officer, 
director, a person performing the functions of an officer or a director 
of, or an attorney for, the submitting party. Annual reports submitted 
pursuant to Sec.  202.1103, and reports on rejected transactions 
submitted pursuant to Sec.  202.1104, must be signed by an officer, a 
director, a person performing the functions of an officer or a 
director, or an employee responsible for compliance. In appropriate 
cases, the Department of Justice may require the chief executive 
officer of a requesting party to sign the request. Each such person 
signing a submission must certify that the submission is true, 
accurate, and complete.

Subpart M--Penalties and Finding of Violation


Sec.  202.1301  Penalties for violations.

    (a) Civil and criminal penalties. Section 206 of IEEPA, 50 U.S.C. 
1705, is applicable to violations of the provisions of any license, 
ruling, regulation, order, directive, or instruction issued by or 
pursuant to the direction or authorization of the Attorney General 
pursuant to this part or otherwise under IEEPA.
    (1) A civil penalty not to exceed the amount set forth in section 
206 of IEEPA may be imposed on any person who violates, attempts to 
violate, conspires to violate, or causes a violation of any license, 
order, regulation, or prohibition issued under IEEPA.
    (2) IEEPA provides for a maximum civil penalty not to exceed the 
greater of $368,136 or an amount that is twice the amount of the 
transaction that is the basis of the violation with respect to which 
the penalty is imposed.
    (3) A person who willfully commits, willfully attempts to commit, 
willfully conspires to commit, or aids or abets in the commission of a 
violation of any license, order, regulation, or prohibition issued 
under IEEPA shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $1,000,000, 
or if a natural person, may be imprisoned for not more than 20 years, 
or both.
    (b) Adjustment of civil penalties. The civil penalties provided in 
IEEPA are subject to adjustment pursuant to the Federal Civil Penalties 
Inflation Adjustment Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-410, as amended, 28 
U.S.C. 2461 note).
    (c) Adjustment of criminal penalties. The criminal penalties 
provided in IEEPA are subject to adjustment pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 3571.
    (d) False statements. Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 1001, whoever, in any 
matter within the jurisdiction of the executive, legislative, or 
judicial branch of the Government of the United States, knowingly and 
willfully falsifies, conceals, or covers up by any trick, scheme, or 
device a material fact; or makes any materially false, fictitious, or 
fraudulent statement or representation; or makes or uses any false 
writing or document knowing the same to contain any materially false, 
fictitious, or fraudulent statement or entry shall be fined under title 
18, United States Code, imprisoned, or both.
    (e) Other applicable laws. Violations of this part may also be 
subject to other applicable laws.


Sec.  202.1302  Process for pre-penalty notice.

    (a) When and how issued. (1) If the Department of Justice has 
reason to believe that there has occurred a violation of any provision 
of this part or a violation of the provisions of any license, ruling, 
regulation, order, directive, or instruction issued by or pursuant to 
the direction or authorization of the Attorney General pursuant to this 
part or otherwise under IEEPA and determines that a civil monetary 
penalty is warranted, the

[[Page 1731]]

Department of Justice will issue a pre-penalty notice informing the 
alleged violator of the agency's intent to impose a monetary penalty.
    (2) The pre-penalty notice shall be in writing.
    (3) The pre-penalty notice may be issued whether or not another 
agency has taken any action with respect to the matter.
    (4) The Department shall provide the alleged violator with the 
relevant information that is not privileged, classified, or otherwise 
protected, and that forms the basis for the pre-penalty notice, 
including a description of the alleged violation and proposed penalty 
amount.
    (b) Opportunity to respond. An alleged violator has the right to 
respond to a pre-penalty notice in accordance with Sec.  202.1306.
    (c) Settlement. Settlement discussion may be initiated by the 
Department of Justice, the alleged violator, or the alleged violator's 
authorized representative.
    (d) Representation. A representative of the alleged violator may 
act on behalf of the alleged violator, but any oral communication with 
the Department of Justice prior to a written submission regarding the 
specific allegations contained in the pre-penalty notice must be 
preceded by a written letter of representation, unless the pre-penalty 
notice was served upon the alleged violator in care of the 
representative.


Sec.  202.1303  Penalty imposition.

    If, after considering any written response to the pre-penalty 
notice and any relevant facts, the Department of Justice determines 
that there was a violation by the alleged violator named in the pre-
penalty notice and that a civil monetary penalty is appropriate, the 
Department of Justice may issue a penalty notice to the violator 
containing a determination of the violation and the imposition of the 
monetary penalty. The Department shall provide the violator with any 
relevant, non-classified information that forms the basis of the 
penalty. The issuance of the penalty notice shall constitute final 
agency action. The violator has the right to seek judicial review of 
that final agency action in Federal district court.


Sec.  202.1304  Administrative collection and litigation.

    In the event that the violator does not pay the penalty imposed 
pursuant to this part or make payment arrangements acceptable to the 
Department of Justice, the Department of Justice may refer the matter 
to the Department of the Treasury for administrative collection 
measures or take appropriate action to recover the penalty in any civil 
suit in Federal district court.


Sec.  202.1305  Finding of violation.

    (a) When and how issued. (1) The Department of Justice may issue an 
initial finding of violation that identifies a violation if the 
Department of Justice:
    (i) Determines that there has occurred a violation of any provision 
of this part, or a violation of the provisions of any license, ruling, 
regulation, order, directive, or instruction issued by or pursuant to 
the direction or authorization of the Attorney General pursuant to this 
part or otherwise under IEEPA;
    (ii) Considers it important to document the occurrence of a 
violation; and
    (iii) Concludes that an administrative response is warranted but 
that a civil monetary penalty is not the most appropriate response.
    (2) An initial finding of violation shall be in writing and may be 
issued whether or not another agency has taken any action with respect 
to the matter.
    (3) The Department shall provide the alleged violator with the 
relevant information that is not privileged, classified, or otherwise 
protected, that forms the basis for the finding of violation, including 
a description of the alleged violation.
    (b) Opportunity to respond. An alleged violator has the right to 
contest an initial finding of violation in accordance with Sec.  
202.1306.
    (c) Determination--(1) Determination that a finding of violation is 
warranted. If, after considering the response, the Department of 
Justice determines that a final finding of violation should be issued, 
the Department of Justice will issue a final finding of violation that 
will inform the violator of its decision. The Department shall provide 
the violator with the relevant information that is not privileged, 
classified, or otherwise protected, that forms the basis for the 
finding of violation. A final finding of violation shall constitute 
final agency action. The violator has the right to seek judicial review 
of that final agency action in Federal district court.
    (2) Determination that a finding of violation is not warranted. If, 
after considering the response, the Department of Justice determines a 
finding of violation is not warranted, then the Department of Justice 
will inform the alleged violator of its decision not to issue a final 
finding of violation. A determination by the Department of Justice that 
a final finding of violation is not warranted does not preclude the 
Department of Justice from pursuing other enforcement actions.
    (d) Representation. A representative of the alleged violator may 
act on behalf of the alleged violator, but any oral communication with 
the Department of Justice prior to a written submission regarding the 
specific alleged violations contained in the initial finding of 
violation must be preceded by a written letter of representation, 
unless the initial finding of violation was served upon the alleged 
violator in care of the representative.


Sec.  202.1306  Opportunity to respond to a pre-penalty notice or 
finding of violation.

    (a) Right to respond. An alleged violator has the right to respond 
to a pre-penalty notice or finding of violation by making a written 
presentation to the Department of Justice.
    (b) Deadline for response. A response to a pre-penalty notice or 
finding of violation must be electronically submitted within 30 days of 
electronic service of the notice or finding. The failure to submit a 
response within 30 days shall be deemed to be a waiver of the right to 
respond.
    (c) Extensions of time for response. Any extensions of time will be 
granted, at the discretion of the Department of Justice, only upon 
specific request to the Department of Justice.
    (d) Contents of response. Any response should set forth in detail 
why the alleged violator either believes that a violation of the 
regulations did not occur or why a finding of violation or penalty is 
otherwise unwarranted under the circumstances. The response should 
include all documentary or other evidence available to the alleged 
violator that supports the arguments set forth in the response. The 
Department of Justice will consider all relevant materials submitted in 
the response.

Subpart N--Government-Related Location Data List


Sec.  202.1401  Government-Related Location Data List.

    For each Area ID listed in this section, each of the latitude/
longitude coordinate pairs forms a corner of the geofenced area.

[[Page 1732]]



                                           Table 1 to Sec.   202.1401
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Area ID                                   Latitude/longitude coordinates of geofenced areas
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
1..................  38.935624, -77.207888.  38.931674, -77.199387  38.929289, -77.203229  38.932939, -
                                                                                            77.209328.
2..................  38.950446, -77.125592.  38.952077, -77.120947  38.947468, -77.120060  38.947135, -
                                                                                            77.122809.
3..................  38.953191, -77.372792.  38.953174, -77.369764  38.951148, -77.369759  38.951152, -
                                                                                            77.372781.
4..................  39.113546, -76.777053.  39.131086, -76.758527  39.100086, -76.749715  39.093304, -
                                                                                            76.760882.
5..................  33.416299, -82.172772.  33.416666, -82.164366  33.406350, -82.163645  33.406261, -
                                                                                            82.172947.
6..................  21.525093, -158.019139  21.525362, -           21.518161, -           21.518010, -
                                              158.002575.            158.002233.            158.018364.
7..................  21.475012, -158.061844  21.483357, -           21.479226, -           21.472695, -
                                              158.057568.            158.049881.            158.052371.
8..................  29.449322, -98.646174.  29.452872, -98.637623  29.448069, -98.637303  29.444547, -
                                                                                            98.640607.
9..................  39.273162771, -         39.508996774, -        39.508996774, -        39.273162771, -
                      76.362684384.           76.362684384.          76.049235582.          76.049235582.
10.................  39.0258436940001, -     39.0402111820001, -    39.0402111820001, -    39.0258436940001, -
                      76.9680962199999.       76.9680962199999.      76.9506770369999.      76.9506770369999.
11.................  20.7457155230001, -     20.7494410490001, -    20.7494410490001, -    20.7457155230001, -
                      156.440726997.          156.440726997.         156.431116699.         156.431116699.
12.................  38.8805363480001, -     38.8811994730001, -    38.8811994730001, -    38.8805363480001, -
                      77.1090209989999.       77.1090209989999.      77.1082027119999.      77.1082027119999.
13.................  32.765632877, -         32.786292692, -        32.786292692, -        32.765632877, -
                      97.460085871.           97.460085871.          97.445002478.          97.445002478.
14.................  34.602177924, -         34.652496869, -        34.652496869, -        34.602177924, -
                      118.126219217.          118.126219217.         118.040871203.         118.040871203.
15.................  32.0905440820001, -     32.1053229630001, -    32.1053229630001, -    32.0905440820001, -
                      110.959444035.          110.959444035.         110.922377001.         110.922377001.
16.................  33.8999448750001, -     33.9364828150001, -    33.9364828150001, -    33.8999448750001, -
                      84.540445929.           84.540445929.          84.511508719.          84.511508719.
17.................  36.6657671500001, -     36.7187899800001, -    36.7187899800001, -    36.6657671500001, -
                      76.163567934.           76.163567934.          76.098012048.          76.098012048.
18.................  27.8761052880001, -     27.9157840450001, -    27.9157840450001, -    27.8761052880001, -
                      98.061583281.           98.061583281.          98.0214386.            98.0214386.
19.................  21.3545686960001, -     21.3700858780001, -    21.3700858780001, -    21.3545686960001, -
                      157.926772605.          157.926772605.         157.89962502.          157.89962502.
20.................  39.529701323, -         39.566862548, -        39.566862548, -        39.529701323, -
                      78.871120656.           78.871120656.          78.819110448.          78.819110448.
21.................  31.227908115, -         31.235020282, -        31.235020282, -        31.227908115, -
                      85.654625655.           85.654625655.          85.646160343.          85.646160343.
22.................  45.0576284000001, -     45.0972929400001, -    45.0972929400001, -    45.0576284000001, -
                      83.5785134019999.       83.5785134019999.      83.5582903029999.      83.5582903029999.
23.................  34.6379009080001, -     34.6889874940001, -    34.6889874940001, -    34.6379009080001, -
                      99.303633301.           99.303633301.          99.25506291.           99.25506291.
24.................  32.6375106470001, -     32.6816990190001, -    32.6816990190001, -    32.6375106470001, -
                      117.168353987.          117.168353987.         117.138279193.         117.138279193.
25.................  32.666935251, -         32.675675627, -        32.675675627, -        32.666935251, -
                      117.172352209.          117.172352209.         117.163035197.         117.163035197.
26.................  13.5479750120001,       13.6479224930001,      13.6479224930001,      13.5479750120001,
                      144.840656045.          144.840656045.         144.956626971.         144.956626971.
27.................  33.610199773, -         33.688770568, -        33.688770568, -        33.610199773, -
                      86.013461889.           86.013461889.          85.910594886.          85.910594886.
28.................  27.6372285040001, -     27.6776476600001, -    27.6776476600001, -    27.6372285040001, -
                      81.364060357.           81.364060357.          81.326061341.          81.326061341.
29.................  38.869169115, -         38.887908934, -        38.887908934, -        38.869169115, -
                      77.079135005.           77.079135005.          77.058113411.          77.058113411.
30.................  38.865964869, -         38.869010908, -        38.869010908, -        38.865964869, -
                      77.081320445.           77.081320445.          77.07688713.           77.07688713.
31.................  30.268965988, -         30.26898402, -         30.26898402, -         30.268965988, -
                      97.74101039.            97.74101039.           97.74098961.           97.74098961.
32.................  28.585892605, -         28.58638835, -         28.58638835, -         28.585892605, -
                      81.197868843.           81.197868843.          81.197094434.          81.197094434.
33.................  35.9939351130001, -     35.9939531280001, -    35.9939531280001, -    35.9939351130001, -
                      78.8988567119999.       78.8988567119999.      78.8988345369999.      78.8988345369999.
34.................  35.290658975, -         35.448152643, -        35.448152643, -        35.290658975, -
                      86.1900228969999.       86.1900228969999.      85.9565678559999.      85.9565678559999.
35.................  39.668741192, -         39.735566472, -        39.735566472, -        39.668741192, -
                      74.486379079.           74.486379079.          74.38985998.           74.38985998.
36.................  27.5433418430001, -     27.7481014920001, -    27.7481014920001, -    27.5433418430001, -
                      81.440651203.           81.440651203.          81.140127987.          81.140127987.
37.................  43.329662741, -         43.3804415840001, -    43.3804415840001, -    43.329662741, -
                      89.768817729.           89.768817729.          89.704814972.          89.704814972.
38.................  32.7213462890001, -     32.7304327800001, -    32.7304327800001, -    32.7213462890001, -
                      117.147436521.          117.147436521.         117.142819245.         117.142819245.
39.................  44.810736596, -         44.824436067, -        44.824436067, -        44.810736596, -
                      68.845190583.           68.845190583.          68.817759555.          68.817759555.
40.................  30.378935891, -         30.406043932, -        30.406043932, -        30.378935891, -
                      87.651017989.           87.651017989.          87.616693181.          87.616693181.

[[Page 1733]]

 
41.................  32.460689648, -         32.533707929, -        32.533707929, -        32.460689648, -
                      93.692932035.           93.692932035.          93.531044113.          93.531044113.
42.................  42.1637746650001, -     42.1737587120001, -    42.1737587120001, -    42.1637746650001, -
                      72.721474954.           72.721474954.          72.713127559.          72.713127559.
43.................  32.234848137, -         32.74030585, -         32.74030585, -         32.234848137, -
                      114.563241999.          114.563241999.         113.597922719.         113.597922719.
44.................  32.8717587680001, -     32.9055316810001, -    32.9055316810001, -    32.8717587680001, -
                      112.742209944.          112.742209944.         112.715649106.         112.715649106.
45.................  70.118081036, -         70.13677672, -         70.13677672, -         70.118081036, -
                      143.649422567.          143.649422567.         143.549196508.         143.549196508.
46.................  39.0718274430001, -     39.1737524000001, -    39.1737524000001, -    39.0718274430001, -
                      121.477278056.          121.477278056.         121.321123307.         121.321123307.
47.................  21.3446919420001, -     21.3801950850001, -    21.3801950850001, -    21.3446919420001, -
                      157.715961149.          157.715961149.         157.704152283.         157.704152283.
48.................  39.320337941, -         39.332562421, -        39.332562421, -        39.320337941, -
                      80.27238984.            80.27238984.           80.257518209.          80.257518209.
49.................  64.3151851490001, -     64.3202659380001, -    64.3202659380001, -    64.3151851490001, -
                      146.65232338.           146.65232338.          146.642748991.         146.642748991.
50.................  33.564586567, -         33.577571506, -        33.577571506, -        33.564586567, -
                      86.7593074919999.       86.7593074919999.      86.749335831.          86.749335831.
51.................  33.979025715, -         33.98353888, -         33.98353888, -         33.979025715, -
                      77.920042096.           77.920042096.          77.911945012.          77.911945012.
52.................  37.6569067660001, -     37.7403075720001, -    37.7403075720001, -    37.6569067660001, -
                      84.2697493539999.       84.2697493539999.      84.1739063399999.      84.1739063399999.
53.................  43.549701982, -         43.565222364, -        43.565222364, -        43.549701982, -
                      116.23995646.           116.23995646.          116.203444555.         116.203444555.
54.................  41.928394165, -         41.940084218, -        41.940084218, -        41.928394165, -
                      72.706470888.           72.706470888.          72.6950519379999.      72.6950519379999.
55.................  41.5399982100001, -     41.5451316070001, -    41.5451316070001, -    41.5399982100001, -
                      81.628180911.           81.628180911.          81.623066892.          81.623066892.
56.................  38.259480861, -         38.488443466, -        38.488443466, -        38.259480861, -
                      119.65128069.           119.65128069.          119.46086144.          119.46086144.
57.................  32.7116821270001, -     32.7155456210001, -    32.7155456210001, -    32.7116821270001, -
                      117.172842204.          117.172842204.         117.171235129.         117.171235129.
58.................  40.5796208020001, -     40.5851822330001, -    40.5851822330001, -    40.5796208020001, -
                      73.881158344.           73.881158344.          73.875044844.          73.875044844.
59.................  31.3815422060001, -     31.3912525150001, -    31.3912525150001, -    31.3815422060001, -
                      85.978073125.           85.978073125.          85.96646119.           85.96646119.
60.................  39.6792307960001, -     39.7256386980001, -    39.7256386980001, -    39.6792307960001, -
                      104.791155246.          104.791155246.         104.732681808.         104.732681808.
61.................  44.465375824, -         44.481431105, -        44.481431105, -        44.465375824, -
                      73.165872108.           73.165872108.          73.138589437.          73.138589437.
62.................  18.246447926, -         18.250653732, -        18.250653732, -        18.246447926, -
                      65.580288041.           65.580288041.          65.57513189.           65.57513189.
63.................  31.2653802660001, -     31.2900770820001, -    31.2900770820001, -    31.2653802660001, -
                      85.730112602.           85.730112602.          85.701272345.          85.701272345.
64.................  13.488847714,           13.650804937,          13.650804937,          13.488847714,
                      144.8237902.            144.8237902.           144.882806074.         144.882806074.
65.................  41.613354353, -         42.134619451, -        42.134619451, -        41.613354353, -
                      93.9831494479999.       93.9831494479999.      93.625230214.          93.625230214.
66.................  34.6199016640001, -     34.6357614130001, -    34.6357614130001, -    34.6199016640001, -
                      84.1105367119999.       84.1105367119999.      84.0950752379999.      84.0950752379999.
67.................  44.5103232180001, -     44.8976058610001, -    44.8976058610001, -    44.5103232180001, -
                      85.0727276169999.       85.0727276169999.      84.4513643499999.      84.4513643499999.
68.................  35.0011406840001, -     35.0683094360001, -    35.0683094360001, -    35.0011406840001, -
                      79.523939868.           79.523939868.          79.442653881.          79.442653881.
69.................  32.641816556, -         32.70380767, -         32.70380767, -         32.641816556, -
                      116.466773316.          116.466773316.         116.419479903.         116.419479903.
70.................  32.707519441, -         32.714794633, -        32.714794633, -        32.707519441, -
                      116.520980841.          116.520980841.         116.509578866.         116.509578866.
71.................  35.1488975340001, -     35.2519317510001, -    35.2519317510001, -    35.1488975340001, -
                      111.913136629.          111.913136629.         111.772220092.         111.772220092.
72.................  35.688234999, -         35.893098334, -        35.893098334, -        35.688234999, -
                      120.85951023.           120.85951023.          120.711509738.         120.711509738.
73.................  30.91049165, -          31.215207751, -        31.215207751, -        30.91049165, -
                      89.245591473.           89.245591473.          88.825853545.          88.825853545.
74.................  40.3878151230001, -     40.4646164020001, -    40.4646164020001, -    40.3878151230001, -
                      112.116737638.          112.116737638.         111.91331559.          111.91331559.
75.................  34.40563345, -          34.412489823, -        34.412489823, -        34.40563345, -
                      103.337070541.          103.337070541.         103.319797859.         103.319797859.
76.................  34.3614483640001, -     34.4053770780001, -    34.4053770780001, -    34.3614483640001, -
                      103.354726446.          103.354726446.         103.295530382.         103.295530382.

[[Page 1734]]

 
77.................  28.410293461, -         28.569239286, -        28.569239286, -        28.410293461, -
                      80.611521457.           80.611521457.          80.525040895.          80.525040895.
78.................  58.6207566940001, -     58.6671382160001, -    58.6671382160001, -    58.6207566940001, -
                      162.088477025.          162.088477025.         162.051955173.         162.051955173.
79.................  39.843911672, -         39.853707959, -        39.853707959, -        39.843911672, -
                      89.673153301.           89.673153301.          89.664434939.          89.664434939.
80.................  40.1998354450001, -     40.2155193840001, -    40.2155193840001, -    40.1998354450001, -
                      77.1813079679999.       77.1813079679999.      77.1567188819999.      77.1567188819999.
81.................  48.720965666, -         48.732224729, -        48.732224729, -        48.720965666, -
                      97.91415126.            97.91415126.           97.892530954.          97.892530954.
82.................  30.3692267820001, -     30.3839136300001, -    30.3839136300001, -    30.3692267820001, -
                      89.145003244.           89.145003244.          89.1029689419999.      89.1029689419999.
83.................  34.133132274, -         34.1468546850001, -    34.1468546850001, -    34.133132274, -
                      119.113804625.          119.113804625.         119.107499465.         119.107499465.
84.................  35.2130798650001, -     35.2209434880001, -    35.2209434880001, -    35.2130798650001, -
                      80.93434288.            80.93434288.           80.924747233.          80.924747233.
85.................  37.268469865, -         37.300168225, -        37.300168225, -        37.268469865, -
                      76.6497831579999.       76.6497831579999.      76.5808454679999.      76.5808454679999.
86.................  38.652772446, -         38.665190459, -        38.665190459, -        38.652772446, -
                      76.537514883.           76.537514883.          76.526755785.          76.526755785.
87.................  38.730266928, -         38.748479779, -        38.748479779, -        38.730266928, -
                      104.854175709.          104.854175709.         104.830998169.         104.830998169.
88.................  41.1585808, -           41.163962628, -        41.163962628, -        41.1585808, -
                      104.827282882.          104.827282882.         104.811583526.         104.811583526.
89.................  33.0433918000001, -     33.561860554, -        33.561860554, -        33.0433918000001, -
                      115.769002927.          115.769002927.         114.937048224.         114.937048224.
90.................  64.256937909, -         64.318532807, -        64.318532807, -        64.256937909, -
                      149.271311872.          149.271311872.         149.078782527.         149.078782527.
91.................  48.0181544170001, -     48.0882406420001, -    48.0882406420001, -    48.0181544170001, -
                      122.749058066.          122.749058066.         122.699833714.         122.699833714.
92.................  55.260399471, -         55.266039599, -        55.266039599, -        55.260399471, -
                      162.892009844.          162.892009844.         162.882133146.         162.882133146.
93.................  32.9238514580001, -     33.6613396510001, -    33.6613396510001, -    32.9238514580001, -
                      88.597781493.           88.597781493.          88.419408536.          88.419408536.
94.................  42.2857517910001, -     42.2934966590001, -    42.2934966590001, -    42.2857517910001, -
                      71.366797532.           71.366797532.          71.355575286.          71.355575286.
95.................  30.396955129, -         30.41034727, -         30.41034727, -         30.396955129, -
                      87.301358539.           87.301358539.          87.278142462.          87.278142462.
96.................  36.8832992170001, -     36.8943868090001, -    36.8943868090001, -    36.8832992170001, -
                      76.3808126719999.       76.3808126719999.      76.3390713729999.      76.3390713729999.
97.................  36.4941214200001, -     36.7385429400001, -    36.7385429400001, -    36.4941214200001, -
                      115.88042321.           115.88042321.          115.4868387.           115.4868387.
98.................  21.299764458, -         21.327294536, -        21.327294536, -        21.299764458, -
                      158.073065748.          158.073065748.         158.044610628.         158.044610628.
99.................  36.779547069, -         36.782099199, -        36.782099199, -        36.779547069, -
                      119.702471155.          119.702471155.         119.701514522.         119.701514522.
100................  42.15393814, -          42.158515225, -        42.158515225, -        42.15393814, -
                      70.9374754149999.       70.9374754149999.      70.9301741339999.      70.9301741339999.
101................  48.4214595020001, -     48.5515751880001, -    48.5515751880001, -    48.4214595020001, -
                      117.41300542.           117.41300542.          117.35926532.          117.35926532.
102................  26.091587869, -         26.092584016, -        26.092584016, -        26.091587869, -
                      80.111818708.           80.111818708.          80.108205835.          80.108205835.
103................  35.6459372400001, -     35.7768890170001, -    35.7768890170001, -    35.6459372400001, -
                      75.991669019.           75.991669019.          75.771652698.          75.771652698.
104................  32.1193109110001, -     32.1962087390001, -    32.1962087390001, -    32.1193109110001, -
                      110.909314221.          110.909314221.         110.789766372.         110.789766372.
105................  37.408487704, -         37.439266805, -        37.439266805, -        37.408487704, -
                      77.453738162.           77.453738162.          77.435618651.          77.435618651.
106................  38.8781991000001, -     38.8792949460001, -    38.8792949460001, -    38.8781991000001, -
                      77.109040482.           77.109040482.          77.108174294.          77.108174294.
107................  40.1972506380001, -     40.2226551520001, -    40.2226551520001, -    40.1972506380001, -
                      76.853865245.           76.853865245.          76.8221857039999.      76.8221857039999.
108................  39.974582163, -         39.985122185, -        39.985122185, -        39.974582163, -
                      82.913383443.           82.913383443.          82.884325098.          82.884325098.
109................  41.537901628, -         41.549978514, -        41.549978514, -        41.537901628, -
                      93.674402705.           93.674402705.          93.657102163.          93.657102163.
110................  30.40946552, -          30.412738745, -        30.412738745, -        30.40946552, -
                      86.500613385.           86.500613385.          86.4971744769999.      86.4971744769999.
111................  37.9630717110001, -     38.0227201040001, -    38.0227201040001, -    37.9630717110001, -
                      122.027819871.          122.027819871.         121.939142028.         121.939142028.
112................  39.8839370650001, -     39.8984743260001, -    39.8984743260001, -    39.8839370650001, -
                      75.190933843.           75.190933843.          75.16306509.           75.16306509.

[[Page 1735]]

 
113................  42.4914812000001, -     42.5026695230001, -    42.5026695230001, -    42.4914812000001, -
                      83.046418438.           83.046418438.          83.037544269.          83.037544269.
114................  42.4694829900001, -     42.5765892500001, -    42.5765892500001, -    42.4694829900001, -
                      71.691664547.           71.691664547.          71.603764233.          71.603764233.
115................  46.9314271700001, -     46.9342671660001, -    46.9342671660001, -    46.9314271700001, -
                      67.8969077639999.       67.8969077639999.      67.8923200479999.      67.8923200479999.
116................  21.567863645, -         21.581952858, -        21.581952858, -        21.567863645, -
                      158.21347981.           158.21347981.          158.180039671.         158.180039671.
117................  28.0671354250001, -     28.1245884970001, -    28.1245884970001, -    28.0671354250001, -
                      98.778173769.           98.778173769.          98.685192869.          98.685192869.
118................  33.8969244250001, -     33.9367576460001, -    33.9367576460001, -    33.8969244250001, -
                      84.542380856.           84.542380856.          84.495305955.          84.495305955.
119................  39.10595655, -          39.152386899, -        39.152386899, -        39.10595655, -
                      75.494449085.           75.494449085.          75.436634728.          75.436634728.
120................  24.568031467, -         24.585123807, -        24.585123807, -        24.568031467, -
                      81.781745689.           81.781745689.          81.765170818.          81.765170818.
121................  32.674333394, -         32.692839739, -        32.692839739, -        32.674333394, -
                      117.133765.             117.133765.            117.108967938.         117.108967938.
122................  46.8330442210001, -     46.8510308170001, -    46.8510308170001, -    46.8330442210001, -
                      92.21102751.            92.21102751.           92.165423416.          92.165423416.
123................  32.3941914100001, -     32.4478988670001, -    32.4478988670001, -    32.3941914100001, -
                      99.867572545.           99.867572545.          99.808678428.          99.808678428.
124................  52.7044712040001,       52.7410254930001,      52.7410254930001,      52.7044712040001,
                      174.053643507.          174.053643507.         174.156518998.         174.156518998.
125................  34.762486344, -         35.017611389, -        35.017611389, -        34.762486344, -
                      118.140763438.          118.140763438.         117.525081645.         117.525081645.
126................  30.381138945, -         30.405275435, -        30.405275435, -        30.381138945, -
                      86.8509824239999.       86.8509824239999.      86.6331687359999.      86.6331687359999.
127................  30.6217855130001, -     30.6494843350001, -    30.6494843350001, -    30.6217855130001, -
                      86.7554594279999.       86.7554594279999.      86.7303715759999.      86.7303715759999.
128................  27.0764966720001, -     30.7497294690001, -    30.7497294690001, -    27.0764966720001, -
                      86.983116121.           86.983116121.          82.448862506.          82.448862506.
129................  64.6012802210001, -     64.7480079510001, -    64.7480079510001, -    64.6012802210001, -
                      147.165786418.          147.165786418.         146.938371648.         146.938371648.
130................  36.8644398160001, -     36.8708429060001, -    36.8708429060001, -    36.8644398160001, -
                      76.3344377989999.       76.3344377989999.      76.3299793119999.      76.3299793119999.
131................  29.5899224830001, -     29.6230511860001, -    29.6230511860001, -    29.5899224830001, -
                      95.17474779.            95.17474779.           95.16633921.           95.16633921.
132................  44.112997566, -         44.176511165, -        44.176511165, -        44.112997566, -
                      103.129144564.          103.129144564.         103.060660125.         103.060660125.
133................  31.325926945, -         31.34466339, -         31.34466339, -         31.325926945, -
                      92.549004972.           92.549004972.          92.532050872.          92.532050872.
134................  39.4012000000001, -     39.4140000010001, -    39.4140000010001, -    39.4012000000001, -
                      77.9954.                77.9954.               77.9708.               77.9708.
135................  47.5887747180001, -     47.6428480860001, -    47.6428480860001, -    47.5887747180001, -
                      117.693058242.          117.693058242.         117.623082729.         117.623082729.
136................  33.3291382400001, -     33.3984247810001, -    33.3984247810001, -    33.3291382400001, -
                      117.313779432.          117.313779432.         117.249241913.         117.249241913.
137................  38.826363557, -         39.942237, -           39.942237, -           38.826363557, -
                      118.950589204.          118.950589204.         117.125199131.         117.125199131.
138................  36.9206436430001, -     36.9225983950001, -    36.9225983950001, -    36.9206436430001, -
                      76.324596591.           76.324596591.          76.321048116.          76.321048116.
139................  30.395125636, -         30.406669179, -        30.406669179, -        30.395125636, -
                      81.633046236.           81.633046236.          81.613437212.          81.613437212.
140................  24.567441214, -         24.594738599, -        24.594738599, -        24.567441214, -
                      81.801443736.           81.801443736.          81.79382837.           81.79382837.
141................  38.9355059150001, -     38.9672269680001, -    38.9672269680001, -    38.9355059150001, -
                      95.6866671779999.       95.6866671779999.      95.6739997489999.      95.6739997489999.
142................  32.7263297590001, -     32.7323354850001, -    32.7323354850001, -    32.7263297590001, -
                      117.225651967.          117.225651967.         117.215769817.         117.215769817.
143................  41.4732485420001, -     41.4772592680001, -    41.4772592680001, -    41.4732485420001, -
                      71.3429884129999.       71.3429884129999.      71.3354651549999.      71.3354651549999.
144................  38.6728683430001, -     38.7484680470001, -    38.7484680470001, -    38.6728683430001, -
                      77.202015081.           77.202015081.          77.1209734769999.      77.1209734769999.
145................  39.855326909, -         39.864369447, -        39.864369447, -        39.855326909, -
                      86.028620872.           86.028620872.          86.003845091.          86.003845091.
146................  31.7888139250001, -     32.6965880790001, -    32.6965880790001, -    31.7888139250001, -
                      106.581474459.          106.581474459.         105.524846042.         105.524846042.
147................  18.4046924090001, -     18.4221096420001, -    18.4221096420001, -    18.4046924090001, -
                      66.1341755349999.       66.1341755349999.      66.1054899209999.      66.1054899209999.
148................  36.5354833810001, -     36.7268240330001, -    36.7268240330001, -    36.5354833810001, -
                      87.820914236.           87.820914236.          87.423400866.          87.423400866.

[[Page 1736]]

 
149................  38.418237328, -         38.765149965, -        38.765149965, -        38.418237328, -
                      104.967064928.          104.967064928.         104.717754537.         104.717754537.
150................  30.7215072980001, -     31.3927951710001, -    31.3927951710001, -    30.7215072980001, -
                      97.913021062.           97.913021062.          97.382600936.          97.382600936.
151................  21.277988357, -         21.28553417, -         21.28553417, -         21.277988357, -
                      157.837039889.          157.837039889.         157.831141168.         157.831141168.
152................  39.428600294, -         39.450390568, -        39.450390568, -        39.428600294, -
                      77.437471934.           77.437471934.          77.410819037.          77.410819037.
153................  39.0020859900001, -     39.0129141590001, -    39.0129141590001, -    39.0020859900001, -
                      77.060006807.           77.060006807.          77.05003399.           77.05003399.
154................  39.0320227890001, -     39.0346693610001, -    39.0346693610001, -    39.0320227890001, -
                      77.04385429.            77.04385429.           77.03866628.           77.03866628.
155................  44.010913031, -         44.256536804, -        44.256536804, -        44.010913031, -
                      75.842125669.           75.842125669.          75.386367945.          75.386367945.
156................  33.274519335, -         33.440619771, -        33.440619771, -        33.274519335, -
                      82.379611728.           82.379611728.          82.096232277.          82.096232277.
157................  33.6089633770001, -     33.6319158920001, -    33.6319158920001, -    33.6089633770001, -
                      84.35154274.            84.35154274.           84.307486309.          84.307486309.
158................  63.9388112670001, -     64.0231208060001, -    64.0231208060001, -    63.9388112670001, -
                      145.772613518.          145.772613518.         145.655809936.         145.655809936.
159................  37.213516865, -         37.298684924, -        37.298684924, -        37.213516865, -
                      77.358595158.           77.358595158.          77.307488144.          77.307488144.
160................  40.604582683, -         40.613167841, -        40.613167841, -        40.604582683, -
                      74.034049003.           74.034049003.          74.0206090659999.      74.0206090659999.
161................  31.434363842, -         31.686859773, -        31.686859773, -        31.434363842, -
                      110.449131361.          110.449131361.         110.188946087.         110.188946087.
162................  35.7935092910001, -     36.1147194860001, -    36.1147194860001, -    35.7935092910001, -
                      121.426498813.          121.426498813.         121.031600619.         121.031600619.
163................  35.082504812, -         35.627708795, -        35.627708795, -        35.082504812, -
                      117.084003937.          117.084003937.         116.163545882.         116.163545882.
164................  33.9829769470001, -     34.0836392030001, -    34.0836392030001, -    33.9829769470001, -
                      80.959251815.           80.959251815.          80.704124579.          80.704124579.
165................  30.921870988, -         31.490503162, -        31.490503162, -        30.921870988, -
                      93.579998793.           93.579998793.          92.862745164.          92.862745164.
166................  37.78807672, -          38.0073711200001, -    38.0073711200001, -    37.78807672, -
                      86.056877114.           86.056877114.          85.747574551.          85.747574551.
167................  39.3284266840001, -     39.3922569280001, -    39.3922569280001, -    39.3284266840001, -
                      94.949264706.           94.949264706.          94.880745646.          94.880745646.
168................  37.6037963470001, -     37.7999725520001, -    37.7999725520001, -    37.6037963470001, -
                      92.2500513099999.       92.2500513099999.      92.0408380759999.      92.0408380759999.
169................  35.039462073, -         35.274563988, -        35.274563988, -        35.039462073, -
                      79.38062969.            79.38062969.           78.901879671.          78.901879671.
170................  43.90284867, -          44.159924233, -        44.159924233, -        43.90284867, -
                      90.765375865.           90.765375865.          90.587856675.          90.587856675.
171................  39.071479147, -         39.130981819, -        39.130981819, -        39.071479147, -
                      76.776616336.           76.776616336.          76.709232204.          76.709232204.
172................  40.2844597280001, -     40.3390552010001, -    40.3390552010001, -    40.2844597280001, -
                      74.096750839.           74.096750839.          74.026249284.          74.026249284.
173................  37.000205414, -         37.035192566, -        37.035192566, -        37.000205414, -
                      76.3170219039999.       76.3170219039999.      76.2925912169999.      76.2925912169999.
174................  32.2387118290001, -     32.5517604030001, -    32.5517604030001, -    32.2387118290001, -
                      85.021200904.           85.021200904.          84.637054935.          84.637054935.
175................  31.314144049, -         31.505687537, -        31.505687537, -        31.314144049, -
                      85.865695246.           85.865695246.          85.612193512.          85.612193512.
176................  39.0366899860001, -     39.3067854380001, -    39.3067854380001, -    39.0366899860001, -
                      96.962729439.           96.962729439.          96.681803847.          96.681803847.
177................  21.3344869650001, -     21.3570876230001, -    21.3570876230001, -    21.3344869650001, -
                      157.894073145.          157.894073145.         157.87189508.          157.87189508.
178................  42.203459073, -         42.216029281, -        42.216029281, -        42.203459073, -
                      87.8100502569999.       87.8100502569999.      87.7987031449999.      87.7987031449999.
179................  34.637509069, -         34.768015017, -        34.768015017, -        34.637509069, -
                      98.755961597.           98.755961597.          98.282396833.          98.282396833.
180................  35.247127112, -         35.345197662, -        35.345197662, -        35.247127112, -
                      94.374048025.           94.374048025.          94.080609487.          94.080609487.
181................  31.8490945500001, -     32.1248422650001, -    32.1248422650001, -    31.8490945500001, -
                      81.889069385.           81.889069385.          81.304927888.          81.304927888.
182................  63.495426454, -         64.877948104, -        64.877948104, -        63.495426454, -
                      148.652607873.          148.652607873.         145.011700164.         145.011700164.
183................  38.018142733, -         38.2229469870001, -    38.2229469870001, -    38.018142733, -
                      77.395133849.           77.395133849.          77.136746906.          77.136746906.
184................  35.4225141090001, -     35.5234010050001, -    35.5234010050001, -    35.4225141090001, -
                      108.629517745.          108.629517745.         108.546488603.         108.546488603.

[[Page 1737]]

 
185................  66.558440788, -         66.562635721, -        66.562635721, -        66.558440788, -
                      145.217198219.          145.217198219.         145.196865879.         145.196865879.
186................  41.131595797, -         41.201251583, -        41.201251583, -        41.131595797, -
                      104.888175803.          104.888175803.         104.839386748.         104.839386748.
187................  40.8317168790001, -     40.8404590060001, -    40.8404590060001, -    40.8317168790001, -
                      72.646569509.           72.646569509.          72.637878307.          72.637878307.
188................  36.7652210320001, -     36.7866408030001, -    36.7866408030001, -    36.7652210320001, -
                      119.726849268.          119.726849268.         119.702290588.         119.702290588.
189................  39.046072102, -         39.068500337, -        39.068500337, -        39.046072102, -
                      76.689705918.           76.689705918.          76.660214864.          76.660214864.
190................  42.9373147850001, -     42.9447209110001, -    42.9447209110001, -    42.9373147850001, -
                      87.891735357.           87.891735357.          87.88532841.           87.88532841.
191................  40.6559953350001, -     40.6713177760001, -    40.6713177760001, -    40.6559953350001, -
                      89.713436026.           89.713436026.          89.691898535.          89.691898535.
192................  42.297663631, -         42.303204758, -        42.303204758, -        42.297663631, -
                      87.8562319869999.       87.8562319869999.      87.8518457849999.      87.8518457849999.
193................  42.0902179130001, -     42.0929537750001, -    42.0929537750001, -    42.0902179130001, -
                      87.8412161049999.       87.8412161049999.      87.8329821559999.      87.8329821559999.
194................  31.410361906, -         31.419467447, -        31.419467447, -        31.410361906, -
                      85.4658208399999.       85.4658208399999.      85.4610573259999.      85.4610573259999.
195................  33.422394339, -         33.427659719, -        33.427659719, -        33.422394339, -
                      112.015046889.          112.015046889.         112.006740103.         112.006740103.
196................  31.4211524990001, -     31.4502936180001, -    31.4502936180001, -    31.4211524990001, -
                      100.421423136.          100.421423136.         100.386562872.         100.386562872.
197................  41.5355012680001, -     41.5398354990001, -    41.5398354990001, -    41.5355012680001, -
                      71.3460647429999.       71.3460647429999.      71.3433558969999.      71.3433558969999.
198................  47.921128756, -         48.00111753, -         48.00111753, -         47.921128756, -
                      97.4238744209999.       97.4238744209999.      97.3251566139999.      97.3251566139999.
199................  32.7378756470001, -     32.7421326520001, -    32.7421326520001, -    32.7378756470001, -
                      96.960057831.           96.960057831.          96.951545219.          96.951545219.
200................  47.471916874, -         47.482136373, -        47.482136373, -        47.471916874, -
                      111.370342141.          111.370342141.         111.35856852.          111.35856852.
201................  38.935411516, -         38.983389468, -        38.983389468, -        38.935411516, -
                      110.143618375.          110.143618375.         110.064497018.         110.064497018.
202................  40.629836335, -         40.6784136910001, -    40.6784136910001, -    40.629836335, -
                      86.175582897.           86.175582897.          86.124933251.          86.124933251.
203................  30.404753499, -         30.416012997, -        30.416012997, -        30.404753499, -
                      89.06446994.            89.06446994.           89.05803309.           89.05803309.
204................  62.384524694, -         62.438701327, -        62.438701327, -        62.384524694, -
                      145.202752458.          145.202752458.         145.108315.            145.108315.
205................  43.0985925350001, -     43.1204055300001, -    43.1204055300001, -    43.0985925350001, -
                      76.1175710329999.       76.1175710329999.      76.0811541549999.      76.0811541549999.
206................  42.449141119, -         42.477596104, -        42.477596104, -        42.449141119, -
                      71.2922332959999.       71.2922332959999.      71.263228187.          71.263228187.
207................  32.728744878, -         32.730100028, -        32.730100028, -        32.728744878, -
                      117.208959019.          117.208959019.         117.205155926.         117.205155926.
208................  44.220163461, -         44.249174018, -        44.249174018, -        44.220163461, -
                      90.111781241.           90.111781241.          89.996184064.          89.996184064.
209................  38.229497861, -         38.675823329, -        38.675823329, -        38.229497861, -
                      118.850468214.          118.850468214.         118.465402259.         118.465402259.
210................  46.9082501180001, -     46.9192707510001, -    46.9192707510001, -    46.9082501180001, -
                      96.813335915.           96.813335915.          96.797905722.          96.797905722.
211................  21.530784666, -         21.541312201, -        21.541312201, -        21.530784666, -
                      158.026158574.          158.026158574.         158.012928076.         158.012928076.
212................  21.4521601660001, -     21.4580696550001, -    21.4580696550001, -    21.4521601660001, -
                      158.036478816.          158.036478816.         158.032403386.         158.032403386.
213................  31.1479145100001, -     31.1546432720001, -    31.1546432720001, -    31.1479145100001, -
                      85.744240415.           85.744240415.          85.729933472.          85.729933472.
214................  41.0983339530001, -     41.1651189630001, -    41.1651189630001, -    41.0983339530001, -
                      112.024399889.          112.024399889.         111.942395214.         111.942395214.
215................  32.7930228270001, -     33.0771885310001, -    33.0771885310001, -    32.7930228270001, -
                      106.204383402.          106.204383402.         106.049512667.         106.049512667.
216................  36.4958650950001, -     36.5518898770001, -    36.5518898770001, -    36.4958650950001, -
                      82.684996348.           82.684996348.          82.546522187.          82.546522187.
217................  32.828679521, -         32.846906967, -        32.846906967, -        32.828679521, -
                      115.288498013.          115.288498013.         115.14568048.          115.14568048.
218................  25.4901310220001, -     25.5181528940001, -    25.5181528940001, -    25.4901310220001, -
                      80.4045291039999.       80.4045291039999.      80.3779792709999.      80.3779792709999.
219................  39.446631245, -         39.458100621, -        39.458100621, -        39.446631245, -
                      87.304009056.           87.304009056.          87.290668741.          87.290668741.
220................  31.3751890450001, -     31.3850761720001, -    31.3850761720001, -    31.3751890450001, -
                      85.5828701299999.       85.5828701299999.      85.5773414419999.      85.5773414419999.

[[Page 1738]]

 
221................  31.9832369490001, -     32.0349005460001, -    32.0349005460001, -    31.9832369490001, -
                      81.198805141.           81.198805141.          81.113375475.          81.113375475.
222................  30.406119645, -         30.45486409, -         30.45486409, -         30.406119645, -
                      86.74211065.            86.74211065.           86.655360926.          86.655360926.
223................  32.5545594160001, -     32.5724338440001, -    32.5724338440001, -    32.5545594160001, -
                      117.133035356.          117.133035356.         117.089509557.         117.089509557.
224................  65.9646785140001, -     66.1009999220001, -    66.1009999220001, -    65.9646785140001, -
                      153.812691683.          153.812691683.         153.662067587.         153.662067587.
225................  38.435308005, -         38.4668353, -          38.4668353, -          38.435308005, -
                      85.627248303.           85.627248303.          85.584713152.          85.584713152.
226................  40.7516430220001, -     40.8294821280001, -    40.8294821280001, -    40.7516430220001, -
                      91.325065862.           91.325065862.          91.178786412.          91.178786412.
227................  32.311624454, -         32.328439256, -        32.328439256, -        32.311624454, -
                      90.0879237459999.       90.0879237459999.      90.0778932449999.      90.0778932449999.
228................  30.402512915, -         30.408229141, -        30.408229141, -        30.402512915, -
                      81.628884649.           81.628884649.          81.613589029.          81.613589029.
229................  29.9570817420001, -     30.4921986090001, -    30.4921986090001, -    29.9570817420001, -
                      81.972797144.           81.972797144.          81.69382023.           81.69382023.
230................  38.8109873670001, -     39.0601368300001, -    39.0601368300001, -    38.8109873670001, -
                      85.4822157569999.       85.4822157569999.      85.3594923629999.      85.3594923629999.
231................  48.1670940830001, -     48.2248098330001, -    48.2248098330001, -    48.1670940830001, -
                      121.958243024.          121.958243024.         121.887559225.         121.887559225.
232................  43.5700133340001, -     43.5962111540001, -    43.5962111540001, -    43.5700133340001, -
                      96.7515566289999.       96.7515566289999.      96.7347550689999.      96.7347550689999.
233................  38.823559833, -         38.867319001, -        38.867319001, -        38.823559833, -
                      77.026428621.           77.026428621.          77.002855219.          77.002855219.
234................  38.7822985190001, -     38.829021577, -        38.829021577, -        38.7822985190001, -
                      76.90343143.            76.90343143.           76.8490210659999.      76.8490210659999.
235................  41.6372929940001, -     41.7708974620001, -    41.7708974620001, -    41.6372929940001, -
                      70.5993199659999.       70.5993199659999.      70.4886883249999.      70.4886883249999.
236................  32.873792952, -         33.621879998, -        33.621879998, -        32.873792952, -
                      81.104787366.           81.104787366.          79.90958174.           79.90958174.
237................  61.1317682310001, -     61.4090492570001, -    61.4090492570001, -    61.1317682310001, -
                      149.879980832.          149.879980832.         149.522914627.         149.522914627.
238................  37.063373746, -         37.182586941, -        37.182586941, -        37.063373746, -
                      76.627940713.           76.627940713.          76.336599693.          76.336599693.
239................  45.8002376150001, -     47.2187487550001, -    47.2187487550001, -    45.8002376150001, -
                      122.802079191.          122.802079191.         119.30029009.          119.30029009.
240................  39.9443860000001, -     40.0586108630001, -    40.0586108630001, -    39.9443860000001, -
                      74.661412648.           74.661412648.          74.304547511.          74.304547511.
241................  38.8611352610001, -     38.8880351040001, -    38.8880351040001, -    38.8611352610001, -
                      77.084491842.           77.084491842.          77.013817583.          77.013817583.
242................  21.2966123480001, -     21.6863899190001, -    21.6863899190001, -    21.2966123480001, -
                      158.17382288.           158.17382288.          157.850223188.         157.850223188.
243................  29.346205018, -         29.893089367, -        29.893089367, -        29.346205018, -
                      98.690308725.           98.690308725.          97.884281333.          97.884281333.
244................  36.892714836, -         36.932892732, -        36.932892732, -        36.892714836, -
                      76.1925524759999.       76.1925524759999.      75.9873603089999.      75.9873603089999.
245................  37.8190118270001, -     37.9512715100001, -    37.9512715100001, -    37.8190118270001, -
                      75.514689614.           75.514689614.          75.413609963.          75.413609963.
246................  40.6939221220001, -     40.7086310680001, -    40.7086310680001, -    40.6939221220001, -
                      84.148196529.           84.148196529.          84.127525454.          84.127525454.
247................  41.3409958870001, -     41.3733639960001, -    41.3733639960001, -    41.3409958870001, -
                      88.082958084.           88.082958084.          88.046036417.          88.046036417.
248................  41.4073674850001, -     41.4365859010001, -    41.4365859010001, -    41.4073674850001, -
                      88.187831293.           88.187831293.          88.107459928.          88.107459928.
249................  21.560298554, -         21.572360392, -        21.572360392, -        21.560298554, -
                      158.266932035.          158.266932035.         158.237835914.         158.237835914.
250................  21.6027392400001, -     21.6936355750001, -    21.6936355750001, -    21.6027392400001, -
                      158.033515202.          158.033515202.         157.95298898.          157.95298898.
251................  22.035974347, -         22.042080758, -        22.042080758, -        22.035974347, -
                      159.75916373.           159.75916373.          159.750865139.         159.750865139.
252................  20.0291620130001, -     20.0374297880001, -    20.0374297880001, -    20.0291620130001, -
                      155.834320072.          155.834320072.         155.823440805.         155.823440805.
253................  30.398126636, -         30.420139346, -        30.420139346, -        30.398126636, -
                      88.9508689469999.       88.9508689469999.      88.896527048.          88.896527048.
254................  36.7153178120001, -     36.7547185190001, -    36.7547185190001, -    36.7153178120001, -
                      98.128361282.           98.128361282.          98.110051089.          98.110051089.
255................  60.558793666, -         60.560759837, -        60.560759837, -        60.558793666, -
                      151.257835885.          151.257835885.         151.254274297.         151.254274297.
256................  19.4318712580001, -     19.4367646340001, -    19.4367646340001, -    19.4318712580001, -
                      155.27720251.           155.27720251.          155.271614951.         155.271614951.

[[Page 1739]]

 
257................  58.638365343, -         58.708746999, -        58.708746999, -        58.638365343, -
                      156.693447262.          156.693447262.         156.459187473.         156.459187473.
258................  42.1444655070001, -     42.1707914760001, -    42.1707914760001, -    42.1444655070001, -
                      121.753628091.          121.753628091.         121.727677654.         121.727677654.
259................  21.4148860290001, -     21.4580033840001, -    21.4580033840001, -    21.4148860290001, -
                      158.014284187.          158.014284187.         157.991853913.         157.991853913.
260................  34.9471711320001, -     35.0673284870001, -    35.0673284870001, -    34.9471711320001, -
                      106.613226109.          106.613226109.         106.360768374.         106.360768374.
261................  57.816486609, -         57.826001907, -        57.826001907, -        57.816486609, -
                      152.341066882.          152.341066882.         152.325036589.         152.325036589.
262................  66.837046801, -         66.856648663, -        66.856648663, -        66.837046801, -
                      162.617184378.          162.617184378.         162.565302627.         162.565302627.
263................  36.900584673, -         36.903859448, -        36.903859448, -        36.900584673, -
                      76.30409839.            76.30409839.           76.300769409.          76.300769409.
264................  39.080371583, -         39.111476783, -        39.111476783, -        39.080371583, -
                      94.283657449.           94.283657449.          94.21198472.           94.21198472.
265................  38.0785775370001, -     38.0962204240001, -    38.0962204240001, -    38.0785775370001, -
                      92.6119067879999.       92.6119067879999.      92.5989103479999.      92.5989103479999.
266................  29.1085864770001, -     29.3792559920001, -    29.3792559920001, -    29.1085864770001, -
                      100.811107299.          100.811107299.         100.460775759.         100.460775759.
267................  39.979501278, -         40.061676766, -        40.061676766, -        39.979501278, -
                      77.766381881.           77.766381881.          77.627738092.          77.627738092.
268................  40.8367062990001, -     40.8453505060001, -    40.8453505060001, -    40.8367062990001, -
                      96.759207222.           96.759207222.          96.74825231.           96.74825231.
269................  68.865164727, -         68.877996761, -        68.877996761, -        68.865164727, -
                      166.153805131.          166.153805131.         166.053355378.         166.053355378.
270................  34.881841514, -         34.928710282, -        34.928710282, -        34.881841514, -
                      92.178033909.           92.178033909.          92.097368909.          92.097368909.
271................  33.7407601990001, -     33.7451476500001, -    33.7451476500001, -    33.7407601990001, -
                      118.234788427.          118.234788427.         118.232155662.         118.232155662.
272................  32.646434739, -         32.694891651, -        32.694891651, -        32.646434739, -
                      94.170119305.           94.170119305.          94.10955796.           94.10955796.
273................  33.916514003, -         34.057048416, -        34.057048416, -        33.916514003, -
                      118.449299679.          118.449299679.         118.378717014.         118.378717014.
274................  33.8581476250001, -     33.8593838490001, -    33.8593838490001, -    33.8581476250001, -
                      118.23660337.           118.23660337.          118.235035273.         118.235035273.
275................  38.173833589, -         38.181490413, -        38.181490413, -        38.173833589, -
                      85.7272245249999.       85.7272245249999.      85.7200947549999.      85.7200947549999.
276................  31.812802193, -         31.818371904, -        31.818371904, -        31.812802193, -
                      85.654704728.           85.654704728.          85.646082241.          85.646082241.
277................  18.439120508, -         18.446769386, -        18.446769386, -        18.439120508, -
                      65.9970120469999.       65.9970120469999.      65.9877331199999.      65.9877331199999.
278................  33.5136616820001, -     33.7241408570001, -    33.7241408570001, -    33.5136616820001, -
                      112.545349748.          112.545349748.         112.319683167.         112.319683167.
279................  27.821277411, -         27.869304053, -        27.869304053, -        27.821277411, -
                      82.537659279.           82.537659279.          82.469154309.          82.469154309.
280................  22.127046405, -         22.13630275, -         22.13630275, -         22.127046405, -
                      159.731450362.          159.731450362.         159.71827724.          159.71827724.
281................  21.5127546910001, -     21.5514708600001, -    21.5514708600001, -    21.5127546910001, -
                      158.239749591.          158.239749591.         158.173991939.         158.173991939
282................  47.4870471620001, -     47.5233762890001, -    47.5233762890001, -    47.4870471620001, -
                      111.21562151.           111.21562151.          111.152194907.         111.152194907.
283................  47.562267374, -         47.570404086, -        47.570404086, -        47.562267374, -
                      122.556511461.          122.556511461.         122.531291341.         122.531291341.
284................  40.8062092000001, -     40.8156897690001, -    40.8156897690001, -    40.8062092000001, -
                      82.5260369709999.       82.5260369709999.      82.5130393979999.      82.5130393979999.
285................  33.855508925, -         33.916474896, -        33.916474896, -        33.855508925, -
                      117.319151995.          117.319151995.         117.239122083.         117.239122083.
286................  34.2011154190001, -     34.7339793100001, -    34.7339793100001, -    34.2011154190001, -
                      116.717969816.          116.717969816.         115.720717569.         115.720717569.
287................  32.280961146, -         32.510825803, -        32.510825803, -        32.280961146, -
                      80.76567248.            80.76567248.           80.65947492.           80.65947492.
288................  34.6814644040001, -     35.076192102, -        35.076192102, -        34.6814644040001, -
                      77.2763334639999.       77.2763334639999.      76.3302441729999.      76.3302441729999.
289................  32.833111095, -         32.920651119, -        32.920651119, -        32.833111095, -
                      117.188623475.          117.188623475.         116.984937219.         116.984937219.
290................  34.558215246, -         34.746048414, -        34.746048414, -        34.558215246, -
                      77.4842054699999.       77.4842054699999.      77.370277147.          77.370277147.
291................  32.622994906, -         32.679820865, -        32.679820865, -        32.622994906, -
                      114.64004722.           114.64004722.          114.578207704.         114.578207704.
292................  34.4950770080001, -     34.7485511280001, -    34.7485511280001, -    34.4950770080001, -
                      77.6073096539999.       77.6073096539999.      77.177756721.          77.177756721.

[[Page 1740]]

 
293................  33.205532089, -         33.503658101, -        33.503658101, -        33.205532089, -
                      117.596249485.          117.596249485.         117.249972307.         117.249972307.
294................  21.4274913960001, -     21.4626192360001, -    21.4626192360001, -    21.4274913960001, -
                      157.778625985.          157.778625985.         157.722086618.         157.722086618.
295................  21.38026423, -          21.392788317, -        21.392788317, -        21.38026423, -
                      157.914545183.          157.914545183.         157.897882367.         157.897882367.
296................  38.4790113490001, -     38.6440896410001, -    38.6440896410001, -    38.4790113490001, -
                      77.609862936.           77.609862936.          77.283059322.          77.283059322.
297................  31.5437915750001, -     31.5617240260001, -    31.5617240260001, -    31.5437915750001, -
                      84.095978531.           84.095978531.          84.007643854.          84.007643854.
298................  34.8434594240001, -     34.8817582680001, -    34.8817582680001, -    34.8434594240001, -
                      116.97121195.           116.97121195.          116.909128396.         116.909128396.
299................  38.5154624990001, -     38.5235364690001, -    38.5235364690001, -    38.5154624990001, -
                      77.3711151099999.       77.3711151099999.      77.3589766939999.      77.3589766939999.
300................  30.391006078, -         30.413437169, -        30.413437169, -        30.391006078, -
                      81.537656096.           81.537656096.          81.509630857.          81.509630857.
301................  38.828254514, -         38.831963061, -        38.831963061, -        38.828254514, -
                      77.120041471.           77.120041471.          77.114666209.          77.114666209.
302................  39.32514001, -          39.337202481, -        39.337202481, -        39.32514001, -
                      76.4241855929999.       76.4241855929999.      76.4075152099999.      76.4075152099999.
303................  48.1206874690001, -     48.1263336970001, -    48.1263336970001, -    48.1206874690001, -
                      122.17350321.           122.17350321.          122.168283314.         122.168283314.
304................  32.365364879, -         32.415623844, -        32.415623844, -        32.365364879, -
                      86.376531674.           86.376531674.          86.232684034.          86.232684034.
305................  21.3463596610001, -     21.3809869910001, -    21.3809869910001, -    21.3463596610001, -
                      157.732313131.          157.732313131.         157.706839578.         157.706839578.
306................  34.75300134, -          34.887500702, -        34.887500702, -        34.75300134, -
                      96.021930066.           96.021930066.          95.825334438.          95.825334438.
307................  38.6375594030001, -     38.6902393680001, -    38.6902393680001, -    38.6375594030001, -
                      121.429181885.          121.429181885.         121.382899272.         121.382899272.
308................  37.5874487990001, -     37.6560529930001, -    37.6560529930001, -    37.5874487990001, -
                      97.29929204.            97.29929204.           97.2134855509999.      97.2134855509999.
309................  33.90292894, -          33.94386779, -         33.94386779, -         33.90292894, -
                      80.822110255.           80.822110255.          80.780803864.          80.780803864.
310................  35.800297926, -         35.822581272, -        35.822581272, -        35.800297926, -
                      84.013675843.           84.013675843.          83.989979889.          83.989979889.
311................  38.36798888, -          38.378026582, -        38.378026582, -        38.36798888, -
                      81.594851531.           81.594851531.          81.58529054.           81.58529054.
312................  32.7348147280001, -     32.7455697900001, -    32.7455697900001, -    32.7348147280001, -
                      117.209483129.          117.209483129.         117.184267844.         117.184267844.
313................  34.214686409, -         34.383336857, -        34.383336857, -        34.214686409, -
                      103.863834999.          103.863834999.         103.668558352.         103.668558352.
314................  35.021000852, -         35.030015831, -        35.030015831, -        35.021000852, -
                      89.9701571149999.       89.9701571149999.      89.9638125029999.      89.9638125029999.
315................  35.815792593, -         35.946160368, -        35.946160368, -        35.815792593, -
                      88.754286881.           88.754286881.          88.646037805.          88.646037805.
316................  38.015441735, -         38.095180461, -        38.095180461, -        38.015441735, -
                      122.065438909.          122.065438909.         121.969625159.         121.969625159.
317................  33.9560292030001, -     34.2460740690001, -    34.2460740690001, -    33.9560292030001, -
                      78.0749530269999.       78.0749530269999.      77.9056468759999.      77.9056468759999.
318................  44.8853655020001, -     44.8980690540001, -    44.8980690540001, -    44.8853655020001, -
                      93.222511412.           93.222511412.          93.19773597.           93.19773597.
319................  48.3955222490001, -     48.4441800980001, -    48.4441800980001, -    48.3955222490001, -
                      101.391958779.          101.391958779.         101.29967086.          101.29967086.
320................  32.792070847, -         32.815502529, -        32.815502529, -        32.792070847, -
                      117.105638208.          117.105638208.         117.081336656.         117.081336656.
321................  32.302879454, -         32.306804183, -        32.306804183, -        32.302879454, -
                      86.410672153.           86.410672153.          86.3958063469999.      86.3958063469999.
322................  30.935302703, -         31.014479318, -        31.014479318, -        30.935302703, -
                      83.219069939.           83.219069939.          83.1288484929999.      83.1288484929999.
323................  43.0246506180001, -     43.0755981900001, -    43.0755981900001, -    43.0246506180001, -
                      115.895653384.          115.895653384.         115.836219587.         115.836219587.
324................  39.041961471, -         39.059126926, -        39.059126926, -        39.041961471, -
                      85.545884974.           85.545884974.          85.502112731.          85.502112731.
325................  32.8074254250001, -     32.8401116740001, -    32.8401116740001, -    32.8074254250001, -
                      115.698918811.          115.698918811.         115.646437997.         115.646437997.
326................  28.5876565020001, -     28.6265345250001, -    28.6265345250001, -    28.5876565020001, -
                      97.628083873.           97.628083873.          97.584907879.          97.584907879.
327................  71.310648094, -         71.344323368, -        71.344323368, -        71.310648094, -
                      156.674424861.          156.674424861.         156.617754628.         156.617754628.
328................  43.8597372520001, -     43.9103207020001, -    43.9103207020001, -    43.8597372520001, -
                      69.95330606.            69.95330606.           69.909873769.          69.909873769.

[[Page 1741]]

 
329................  32.743470873, -         32.787133199, -        32.787133199, -        32.743470873, -
                      97.44549275.            97.44549275.           97.413267401.          97.413267401.
330................  30.1941004770001, -     30.2458023780001, -    30.2458023780001, -    30.1941004770001, -
                      81.7076006299999.       81.7076006299999.      81.6593342339999.      81.6593342339999.
331................  40.1857296150001, -     40.2167846540001, -    40.2167846540001, -    40.1857296150001, -
                      75.164926593.           75.164926593.          75.134209434.          75.134209434.
332................  24.5560839770001, -     24.5971158050001, -    24.5971158050001, -    24.5560839770001, -
                      81.722408305.           81.722408305.          81.653518462.          81.653518462.
333................  27.4674233900001, -     27.5231989330001, -    27.5231989330001, -    27.4674233900001, -
                      97.832157771.           97.832157771.          97.788047634.          97.788047634.
334................  36.255073843, -         36.386386503, -        36.386386503, -        36.255073843, -
                      119.977147505.          119.977147505.         119.869576662.         119.869576662.
335................  30.326507308, -         30.375924031, -        30.375924031, -        30.326507308, -
                      87.352445013.           87.352445013.          87.257235015.          87.257235015.
336................  30.683881264, -         30.738102029, -        30.738102029, -        30.683881264, -
                      87.043781272.           87.043781272.          86.997376436.          86.997376436.
337................  36.106696485, -         36.114637747, -        36.114637747, -        36.106696485, -
                      86.67860059.            86.67860059.           86.67190118.           86.67190118.
338................  32.6696509240001, -     32.6740385570001, -    32.6740385570001, -    32.6696509240001, -
                      117.114230685.          117.114230685.         117.111967973.         117.111967973.
339................  38.9746589920001, -     39.0026084470001, -    39.0026084470001, -    38.9746589920001, -
                      76.4937690629999.       76.4937690629999.      76.4487817289999.      76.4487817289999.
340................  27.61946242, -          27.718208017, -        27.718208017, -        27.61946242, -
                      97.4505952709999.       97.4505952709999.      97.2437083949999.      97.2437083949999.
341................  29.8014398060001, -     29.8575240390001, -    29.8575240390001, -    29.8014398060001, -
                      90.0485449769999.       90.0485449769999.      89.9938950499999.      89.9938950499999.
342................  32.499252175, -         32.602832677, -        32.602832677, -        32.499252175, -
                      88.6318691439999.       88.6318691439999.      88.5064742839999.      88.5064742839999.
343................  36.7852781730001, -     36.8386906080001, -    36.8386906080001, -    36.7852781730001, -
                      76.063232016.           76.063232016.          75.99817255.           75.99817255.
344................  36.760031462, -         36.818318534, -        36.818318534, -        36.760031462, -
                      75.9846076869999.       75.9846076869999.      75.9490831369999.      75.9490831369999.
345................  38.2488191400001, -     38.3093935480001, -    38.3093935480001, -    38.2488191400001, -
                      76.46369128.            76.46369128.           76.373549279.          76.373549279.
346................  48.311418739, -         48.369700655, -        48.369700655, -        48.311418739, -
                      122.708096597.          122.708096597.         122.617753395.         122.617753395.
347................  35.2654343400001, -     36.2318077000001, -    36.2318077000001, -    35.2654343400001, -
                      117.8902031.            117.8902031.           116.9249447.           116.9249447.
348................  13.3091094070001,       13.5883222610001,      13.5883222610001,      13.3091094070001,
                      144.618332428.          144.618332428.         144.916357575.         144.916357575.
349................  47.6909210600001, -     47.705184112, -        47.705184112, -        47.6909210600001, -
                      122.628044406.          122.628044406.         122.613798201.         122.613798201.
350................  47.6767991730001, -     47.7726169310001, -    47.7726169310001, -    47.6767991730001, -
                      122.747424327.          122.747424327.         122.691878973.         122.691878973.
351................  47.5449361660001, -     47.5653870590001, -    47.5653870590001, -    47.5449361660001, -
                      122.671768178.          122.671768178.         122.623883723.         122.623883723.
352................  32.675119312, -         32.713082807, -        32.713082807, -        32.675119312, -
                      117.256218377.          117.256218377.         117.234025189.         117.234025189.
353................  32.6582935910001, -     32.6884541840001, -    32.6884541840001, -    32.6582935910001, -
                      117.135977498.          117.135977498.         117.112975083.         117.112975083.
354................  34.088069982, -         34.13946678, -         34.13946678, -         34.088069982, -
                      119.160456826.          119.160456826.         119.064184636.         119.064184636.
355................  34.142955882, -         34.175763756, -        34.175763756, -        34.142955882, -
                      119.221480878.          119.221480878.         119.195140105.         119.195140105.
356................  55.5394297110001, -     55.5429794870001, -    55.5429794870001, -    55.5394297110001, -
                      131.764707731.          131.764707731.         131.755720856.         131.755720856.
357................  46.3564572000001, -     46.3745994580001, -    46.3745994580001, -    46.3564572000001, -
                      98.3483000209999.       98.3483000209999.      98.3233449679999.      98.3233449679999.
358................  28.581333934, -         28.586585157, -        28.586585157, -        28.581333934, -
                      81.200124825.           81.200124825.          81.194259644.          81.194259644.
359................  18.392254736, -         18.405878229, -        18.405878229, -        18.392254736, -
                      67.185834374.           67.185834374.          67.170701901.          67.170701901.
360................  44.6232594310001, -     44.7036300010001, -    44.7036300010001, -    44.6232594310001, -
                      67.328272859.           67.328272859.          67.254518602.          67.254518602.
361................  38.9186807040001, -     38.9241721890001, -    38.9241721890001, -    38.9186807040001, -
                      77.070549603.           77.070549603.          77.063519892.          77.063519892.
362................  38.8200046750001, -     38.8300043240001, -    38.8300043240001, -    38.8200046750001, -
                      77.027450812.           77.027450812.          77.017462058.          77.017462058.
363................  38.406152209, -         38.43740876, -         38.43740876, -         38.406152209, -
                      77.110740786.           77.110740786.          77.0729468369999.      77.0729468369999.
364................  30.33369265, -          30.417826484, -        30.417826484, -        30.33369265, -
                      89.64817211.            89.64817211.           89.557854425.          89.557854425.

[[Page 1742]]

 
365................  38.6769074200001, -     38.6792870940001, -    38.6792870940001, -    38.6769074200001, -
                      76.34415482.            76.34415482.           76.343227801.          76.343227801.
366................  42.3047750280001, -     42.3249165520001, -    42.3249165520001, -    42.3047750280001, -
                      87.845909294.           87.845909294.          87.828493071.          87.828493071.
367................  41.503275973, -         41.554006671, -        41.554006671, -        41.503275973, -
                      71.330843392.           71.330843392.          71.30062478.           71.30062478.
368................  36.9170290100001, -     36.9640415810001, -    36.9640415810001, -    36.9170290100001, -
                      76.335615748.           76.335615748.          76.2618193489999.      76.2618193489999.
369................  30.748875362, -         30.837030033, -        30.837030033, -        30.748875362, -
                      81.576797991.           81.576797991.          81.479993971.          81.479993971.
370................  41.3859700670001, -     41.4104621860001, -    41.4104621860001, -    41.3859700670001, -
                      72.09385059.            72.09385059.           72.07728596.           72.07728596.
371................  36.8809746540001, -     36.8890977200001, -    36.8890977200001, -    36.8809746540001, -
                      76.427321462.           76.427321462.          76.419013745.          76.419013745.
372................  38.74493505, -          38.919755352, -        38.919755352, -        38.74493505, -
                      86.905209651.           86.905209651.          86.6788119869999.      86.6788119869999.
373................  30.158883738, -         30.188382598, -        30.188382598, -        30.158883738, -
                      85.760741626.           85.760741626.          85.738993885.          85.738993885.
374................  40.0361710110001, -     40.0471374300001, -    40.0471374300001, -    40.0361710110001, -
                      75.101397768.           75.101397768.          75.088731354.          75.088731354.
375................  38.871230644, -         38.876356839, -        38.876356839, -        38.871230644, -
                      76.9994186819999.       76.9994186819999.      76.9912418639999.      76.9912418639999.
376................  38.9719405210001, -     38.9783021020001, -    38.9783021020001, -    38.9719405210001, -
                      77.203514559.           77.203514559.          77.180406372.          77.180406372.
377................  38.3186054830001, -     38.3591595940001, -    38.3591595940001, -    38.3186054830001, -
                      77.051455995.           77.051455995.          77.014266139.          77.014266139.
378................  38.5619658580001, -     38.6069805630001, -    38.6069805630001, -    38.5619658580001, -
                      77.2103647979999.       77.2103647979999.      77.1602485849999.      77.1602485849999.
379................  47.9738990070001, -     47.9810063290001, -    47.9810063290001, -    47.9738990070001, -
                      116.566365931.          116.566365931.         116.520622995.         116.520622995.
380................  40.2250093260001, -     40.2823128210001, -    40.2823128210001, -    40.2250093260001, -
                      74.214186736.           74.214186736.          74.101728286.          74.101728286.
381................  33.9177546080001, -     33.9314446460001, -    33.9314446460001, -    33.9177546080001, -
                      117.576534598.          117.576534598.         117.562312486.         117.562312486.
382................  37.208022726, -         37.273612882, -        37.273612882, -        37.208022726, -
                      76.633932842.           76.633932842.          76.522493597.          76.522493597.
383................  45.6322259620001, -     45.8065550300001, -    45.8065550300001, -    45.6322259620001, -
                      119.895359741.          119.895359741.         119.455477367.         119.455477367.
384................  32.681825013, -         32.715125046, -        32.715125046, -        32.681825013, -
                      117.229713083.          117.229713083.         117.180755171.         117.180755171.
385................  36.842303428, -         36.849661128, -        36.849661128, -        36.842303428, -
                      76.3151234269999.       76.3151234269999.      76.3024406369999.      76.3024406369999.
386................  35.180398117, -         35.195319693, -        35.195319693, -        35.180398117, -
                      111.749899909.          111.749899909.         111.736545714.         111.736545714.
387................  40.6710820530001, -     40.6820119650001, -    40.6820119650001, -    40.6710820530001, -
                      112.091693872.          112.091693872.         112.057868517.         112.057868517.
388................  37.4104380160001, -     37.4153630160001, -    37.4153630160001, -    37.4104380160001, -
                      122.031548936.          122.031548936.         122.025261936.         122.025261936.
389................  47.966605751, -         47.994496312, -        47.994496312, -        47.966605751, -
                      122.271045712.          122.271045712.         122.21398207.          122.21398207.
390................  30.361267243, -         30.400329774, -        30.400329774, -        30.361267243, -
                      81.4636657189999.       81.4636657189999.      81.392276891.          81.392276891.
391................  38.976796961, -         38.986732986, -        38.986732986, -        38.976796961, -
                      76.4937690629999.       76.4937690629999.      76.4761382759999.      76.4761382759999.
392................  38.9970659050001, -     39.0074154440001, -    39.0074154440001, -    38.9970659050001, -
                      77.097142558.           77.097142558.          77.083297186.          77.083297186.
393................  36.9181778190001, -     36.933520845, -        36.933520845, -        36.9181778190001, -
                      76.317281615.           76.317281615.          76.2811604669999.      76.2811604669999.
394................  40.216016376, -         40.239975455, -        40.239975455, -        40.216016376, -
                      77.001594842.           77.001594842.          76.970791628.          76.970791628.
395................  35.3183642820001, -     35.3408744740001, -    35.3408744740001, -    35.3183642820001, -
                      89.890382347.           89.890382347.          89.85751768.           89.85751768.
396................  36.593508146, -         36.600645199, -        36.600645199, -        36.593508146, -
                      121.878756787.          121.878756787.         121.867184688.         121.867184688.
397................  36.8096651020001, -     36.8288368000001, -    36.8288368000001, -    36.8096651020001, -
                      76.311406446.           76.311406446.          76.291685476.          76.291685476.
398................  32.384281554, -         32.394141164, -        32.394141164, -        32.384281554, -
                      80.685725766.           80.685725766.          80.678089804.          80.678089804.
399................  33.729669684, -         33.774096004, -        33.774096004, -        33.729669684, -
                      118.099622184.          118.099622184.         118.041605831.         118.041605831.
400................  36.5872707780001, -     36.5945029280001, -    36.5945029280001, -    36.5872707780001, -
                      121.866360531.          121.866360531.         121.851862108.         121.851862108.

[[Page 1743]]

 
401................  36.2034528880001, -     36.3992515790001, -    36.3992515790001, -    36.2034528880001, -
                      115.073249953.          115.073249953.         114.91920859.          114.91920859.
402................  36.4668551030001, -     37.9076912670001, -    37.9076912670001, -    36.4668551030001, -
                      117.094718948.          117.094718948.         115.3004082.           115.3004082.
403................  42.919235051, -         42.952654138, -        42.952654138, -        42.919235051, -
                      71.671337464.           71.671337464.          71.616026331.          71.616026331.
404................  39.6829375310001, -     39.6923952360001, -    39.6923952360001, -    39.6829375310001, -
                      75.600492457.           75.600492457.          75.593307553.          75.593307553.
405................  43.10473267, -          43.107704771, -        43.107704771, -        43.10473267, -
                      70.797901469.           70.797901469.          70.7919169979999.      70.7919169979999.
406................  33.568962911, -         33.57308195, -         33.57308195, -         33.568962911, -
                      86.751872966.           86.751872966.          86.748821474.          86.748821474.
407................  61.599438526, -         61.606721914, -        61.606721914, -        61.599438526, -
                      149.390055835.          149.390055835.         149.35973238.          149.35973238.
408................  36.013579803, -         36.020786485, -        36.020786485, -        36.013579803, -
                      115.202476334.          115.202476334.         115.198858962.         115.198858962.
409................  45.079114062, -         45.108075439, -        45.108075439, -        45.079114062, -
                      93.178546539.           93.178546539.          93.147375066.          93.147375066.
410................  33.7189514350001, -     33.7254539750001, -    33.7254539750001, -    33.7189514350001, -
                      84.361650185.           84.361650185.          84.356222295.          84.356222295.
411................  44.080835533, -         44.094617619, -        44.094617619, -        44.080835533, -
                      70.290540358.           70.290540358.          70.272902712.          70.272902712.
412................  42.546251763, -         42.551133712, -        42.551133712, -        42.546251763, -
                      71.589424731.           71.589424731.          71.5781617369999.      71.5781617369999.
413................  44.8040301450001, -     44.8172629220001, -    44.8172629220001, -    44.8040301450001, -
                      68.8467649249999.       68.8467649249999.      68.8068680369999.      68.8068680369999.
414................  30.354065667, -         30.360422127, -        30.360422127, -        30.354065667, -
                      91.146045237.           91.146045237.          91.1353207689999.      91.1353207689999.
415................  31.4025019330001, -     31.4795765740001, -    31.4795765740001, -    31.4025019330001, -
                      92.335343385.           92.335343385.          92.245795576.          92.245795576.
416................  40.0877668460001, -     40.0907737950001, -    40.0907737950001, -    40.0877668460001, -
                      83.068853255.           83.068853255.          83.066002311.          83.066002311.
417................  44.022196352, -         44.029392756, -        44.029392756, -        44.022196352, -
                      121.133291583.          121.133291583.         121.123271772.         121.123271772.
418................  30.173439579, -         30.178958121, -        30.178958121, -        30.173439579, -
                      97.674627878.           97.674627878.          97.668747043.          97.668747043.
419................  38.5445306760001, -     38.5510787900001, -    38.5510787900001, -    38.5445306760001, -
                      75.0682735199999.       75.0682735199999.      75.0589773919999.      75.0589773919999.
420................  44.1016551610001, -     44.3272733540001, -    44.3272733540001, -    44.1016551610001, -
                      121.17360693.           121.17360693.          121.058161787.         121.058161787.
421................  46.827120683, -         46.832772324, -        46.832772324, -        46.827120683, -
                      100.725445186.          100.725445186.         100.715045706.         100.715045706.
422................  44.392304805, -         44.402273905, -        44.402273905, -        44.392304805, -
                      70.947124474.           70.947124474.          70.928234819.          70.928234819.
423................  47.549068751, -         47.556350796, -        47.556350796, -        47.549068751, -
                      122.684072241.          122.684072241.         122.678571789.         122.678571789.
424................  33.4426391850001, -     33.4939449270001, -    33.4939449270001, -    33.4426391850001, -
                      112.60836981.           112.60836981.          112.590831261.         112.590831261.
425................  41.788965498, -         41.798009108, -        41.798009108, -        41.788965498, -
                      80.0518139389999.       80.0518139389999.      80.0425795319999.      80.0425795319999.
426................  44.708559069, -         44.72023512, -         44.72023512, -         44.708559069, -
                      123.281143191.          123.281143191.         123.259641857.         123.259641857.
427................  41.056686573, -         41.096850084, -        41.096850084, -        41.056686573, -
                      96.34425821.            96.34425821.           96.326681639.          96.326681639.
428................  39.2163393430001, -     39.3929446850001, -    39.3929446850001, -    39.2163393430001, -
                      86.1037530039999.       86.1037530039999.      85.9785740709999.      85.9785740709999.
429................  31.3661086110001, -     31.3916242780001, -    31.3916242780001, -    31.3661086110001, -
                      92.4083963209999.       92.4083963209999.      92.3608840609999.      92.3608840609999.
430................  31.6146126890001, -     31.6667772080001, -    31.6667772080001, -    31.6146126890001, -
                      98.960277256.           98.960277256.          98.901021764.          98.901021764.
431................  41.607753723, -         41.623638419, -        41.623638419, -        41.607753723, -
                      71.505549174.           71.505549174.          71.491180453.          71.491180453.
432................  47.6525289910001, -     48.0636008830001, -    48.0636008830001, -    47.6525289910001, -
                      98.9417105379999.       98.9417105379999.      98.6003789309999.      98.6003789309999.
433................  35.5952678190001, -     35.7838291280001, -    35.7838291280001, -    35.5952678190001, -
                      95.22118754.            95.22118754.           95.126697455.          95.126697455.
434................  41.9394829350001, -     41.9441994120001, -    41.9441994120001, -    41.9394829350001, -
                      72.670901858.           72.670901858.          72.661211157.          72.661211157.
435................  34.8124732220001, -     34.9614877180001, -    34.9614877180001, -    34.8124732220001, -
                      92.3897548209999.       92.3897548209999.      92.2396274969999.      92.2396274969999.
436................  30.3094558060001, -     30.3273409100001, -    30.3273409100001, -    30.3094558060001, -
                      97.768694553.           97.768694553.          97.756391927.          97.756391927.

[[Page 1744]]

 
437................  33.774194279, -         33.832753059, -        33.832753059, -        33.774194279, -
                      95.606477742.           95.606477742.          95.526066382.          95.526066382.
438................  32.5353248810001, -     32.5878534930001, -    32.5878534930001, -    32.5353248810001, -
                      93.475517374.           93.475517374.          93.320012082.          93.320012082.
439................  41.328015147, -         41.334274179, -        41.334274179, -        41.328015147, -
                      72.192567648.           72.192567648.          72.18300523.           72.18300523.
440................  43.2872218000001, -     43.3084647600001, -    43.3084647600001, -    43.2872218000001, -
                      116.090973157.          116.090973157.         116.006279152.         116.006279152.
441................  41.5296110640001, -     41.5564763520001, -    41.5564763520001, -    41.5296110640001, -
                      83.029247488.           83.029247488.          83.011583492.          83.011583492.
442................  44.0771040870001, -     44.0820854380001, -    44.0820854380001, -    44.0771040870001, -
                      103.272190023.          103.272190023.         103.262202287.         103.262202287.
443................  41.1628317710001, -     41.2310363250001, -    41.2310363250001, -    41.1628317710001, -
                      81.1929117339999.       81.1929117339999.      80.97584481.           80.97584481.
444................  46.07222877, -          46.331943757, -        46.331943757, -        46.07222877, -
                      94.558733336.           94.558733336.          94.325692646.          94.325692646.
445................  39.34839557, -          39.360752962, -        39.360752962, -        39.34839557, -
                      82.9650961519999.       82.9650961519999.      82.9383779209999.      82.9383779209999.
446................  41.29766305, -          41.324571403, -        41.324571403, -        41.29766305, -
                      73.975066263.           73.975066263.          73.930650098.          73.930650098.
447................  30.2132250780001, -     30.310193057, -        30.310193057, -        30.2132250780001, -
                      97.335768978.           97.335768978.          97.247469425.          97.247469425.
448................  30.310456754, -         30.336315048, -        30.336315048, -        30.310456754, -
                      89.821504134.           89.821504134.          89.7963621059999.      89.7963621059999.
449................  43.922486604, -         43.932735952, -        43.932735952, -        43.922486604, -
                      90.276809935.           90.276809935.          90.261339487.          90.261339487.
450................  45.4105970370001, -     45.4146313790001, -    45.4146313790001, -    45.4105970370001, -
                      122.564234834.          122.564234834.         122.546020519.         122.546020519.
451................  30.192979226, -         30.209958464, -        30.209958464, -        30.192979226, -
                      91.136406361.           91.136406361.          91.120742129.          91.120742129.
452................  33.671756665, -         33.757794604, -        33.757794604, -        33.671756665, -
                      86.017370951.           86.017370951.          85.882188551.          85.882188551.
453................  40.2117159210001, -     40.2164501770001, -    40.2164501770001, -    40.2117159210001, -
                      75.432393416.           75.432393416.          75.42374491.           75.42374491.
454................  33.6765084310001, -     33.7542460250001, -    33.7542460250001, -    33.6765084310001, -
                      89.7534024129999.       89.7534024129999.      89.6202355929999.      89.6202355929999.
455................  39.378532207, -         39.454188743, -        39.454188743, -        39.378532207, -
                      79.708317675.           79.708317675.          79.639802717.          79.639802717.
456................  42.27527302, -          42.336654723, -        42.336654723, -        42.27527302, -
                      85.3763242809999.       85.3763242809999.      85.2764495459999.      85.2764495459999.
457................  34.222785926, -         34.225953578, -        34.225953578, -        34.222785926, -
                      84.1147041419999.       84.1147041419999.      84.1115279319999.      84.1115279319999.
458................  46.8328736340001, -     46.8345283600001, -    46.8345283600001, -    46.8328736340001, -
                      92.1598417499999.       92.1598417499999.      92.1578269679999.      92.1578269679999.
459................  43.14072293, -          43.147995984, -        43.147995984, -        43.14072293, -
                      115.657766227.          115.657766227.         115.647820427.         115.647820427.
460................  38.949813614, -         38.958420468, -        38.958420468, -        38.949813614, -
                      79.985745343.           79.985745343.          79.972014372.          79.972014372.
461................  31.3824479420001, -     31.4098514070001, -    31.4098514070001, -    31.3824479420001, -
                      92.317091139.           92.317091139.          92.279692875.          92.279692875.
462................  44.4989956200001, -     44.5216654230001, -    44.5216654230001, -    44.4989956200001, -
                      73.174626073.           73.174626073.          73.151341101.          73.151341101.
463................  33.05649478, -          33.118281303, -        33.118281303, -        33.05649478, -
                      111.387806148.          111.387806148.         111.318954206.         111.318954206.
464................  36.276929619, -         36.307014017, -        36.307014017, -        36.276929619, -
                      115.061711815.          115.061711815.         115.024997297.         115.024997297.
465................  36.9652916110001, -     37.1220791840001, -    37.1220791840001, -    36.9652916110001, -
                      78.019676053.           78.019676053.          77.838557255.          77.838557255.
466................  35.177556168, -         35.36254474, -         35.36254474, -         35.177556168, -
                      94.342568303.           94.342568303.          94.026321036.          94.026321036.
467................  40.3805917540001, -     40.4828843550001, -    40.4828843550001, -    40.3805917540001, -
                      76.740923494.           76.740923494.          76.526125382.          76.526125382.
468................  33.7233962760001, -     33.7412047100001, -    33.7412047100001, -    33.7233962760001, -
                      85.799971241.           85.799971241.          85.77787227.           85.77787227.
469................  32.8348369830001, -     32.8906953370001, -    32.8906953370001, -    32.8348369830001, -
                      98.0657312119999.       98.0657312119999.      97.9964332349999.      97.9964332349999.
470................  32.775847904, -         32.781682325, -        32.781682325, -        32.775847904, -
                      97.4626718379999.       97.4626718379999.      97.4528046649999.      97.4528046649999.
471................  38.1716157600001, -     38.1966283680001, -    38.1966283680001, -    38.1716157600001, -
                      84.921448944.           84.921448944.          84.894209462.          84.894209462.
472................  18.002735849, -         18.025884249, -        18.025884249, -        18.002735849, -
                      66.5139236319999.       66.5139236319999.      66.4942110159999.      66.4942110159999.

[[Page 1745]]

 
473................  21.2573388270001, -     21.2696069680001, -    21.2696069680001, -    21.2573388270001, -
                      157.811868495.          157.811868495.         157.793708924.         157.793708924.
474................  33.910428789, -         33.916196229, -        33.916196229, -        33.910428789, -
                      84.5361533929999.       84.5361533929999.      84.522565546.          84.522565546.
475................  40.959663633, -         40.964149849, -        40.964149849, -        40.959663633, -
                      98.301445179.           98.301445179.          98.296290336.          98.296290336.
476................  40.515397589, -         40.567785704, -        40.567785704, -        40.515397589, -
                      98.298239402.           98.298239402.          98.259993615.          98.259993615.
477................  13.471680227,           13.476445623,          13.476445623,          13.471680227,
                      144.807392696.          144.807392696.         144.812949999.         144.812949999.
478................  30.4045289490001, -     30.4205257120001, -    30.4205257120001, -    30.4045289490001, -
                      89.065284316.           89.065284316.          89.059168989.          89.059168989.
479................  30.520223183, -         30.526889408, -        30.526889408, -        30.520223183, -
                      90.417497467.           90.417497467.          90.406882911.          90.406882911.
480................  39.528072455, -         39.536739552, -        39.536739552, -        39.528072455, -
                      76.1100913129999.       76.1100913129999.      76.0982416589999.      76.0982416589999.
481................  46.6059564510001, -     46.6106942060001, -    46.6106942060001, -    46.6059564510001, -
                      111.975646726.          111.975646726.         111.967693583.         111.967693583.
482................  40.4376721520001, -     40.4407479890001, -    40.4407479890001, -    40.4376721520001, -
                      78.4170869339999.       78.4170869339999.      78.4124497679999.      78.4124497679999.
483................  43.659487912, -         43.67992728, -         43.67992728, -         43.659487912, -
                      70.674869746.           70.674869746.          70.654823081.          70.654823081.
484................  39.7424976190001, -     39.7462615480001, -    39.7462615480001, -    39.7424976190001, -
                      86.230956444.           86.230956444.          86.225390797.          86.225390797.
485................  35.3048305680001, -     35.3717978880001, -    35.3717978880001, -    35.3048305680001, -
                      120.756679866.          120.756679866.         120.664040578.         120.664040578.
486................  35.594877598, -         35.601416549, -        35.601416549, -        35.594877598, -
                      88.916399526.           88.916399526.          88.909521524.          88.909521524.
487................  29.9497813040001, -     29.9740232620001, -    29.9740232620001, -    29.9497813040001, -
                      90.0120117979999.       90.0120117979999.      89.9987827089999.      89.9987827089999.
488................  38.8833909860001, -     38.905765642, -        38.905765642, -        38.8833909860001, -
                      81.8464996549999.       81.8464996549999.      81.8170444439999.      81.8170444439999.
489................  39.01630591, -          39.022374526, -        39.022374526, -        39.01630591, -
                      95.6872730109999.       95.6872730109999.      95.6797306829999.      95.6797306829999.
490................  36.4178126140001, -     36.4246402130001, -    36.4246402130001, -    36.4178126140001, -
                      82.493381518.           82.493381518.          82.484291574.          82.484291574.
491................  21.3142785630001, -     21.3240454770001, -    21.3240454770001, -    21.3142785630001, -
                      158.069986235.          158.069986235.         158.056465611.         158.056465611.
492................  39.764279425, -         39.778947386, -        39.778947386, -        39.764279425, -
                      85.527190456.           85.527190456.          85.508361982.          85.508361982.
493................  44.0647301270001, -     44.0670417360001, -    44.0670417360001, -    44.0647301270001, -
                      122.982252253.          122.982252253.         122.973786312.         122.973786312.
494................  42.766389845, -         42.769800145, -        42.769800145, -        42.766389845, -
                      84.576207556.           84.576207556.          84.567413358.          84.567413358.
495................  32.270748628, -         32.280280019, -        32.280280019, -        32.270748628, -
                      106.939138534.          106.939138534.         106.930519974.         106.930519974.
496................  40.2658142980001, -     40.2734112650001, -    40.2734112650001, -    40.2658142980001, -
                      74.748095306.           74.748095306.          74.740257715.          74.740257715.
497................  35.0150424290001, -     35.0295356340001, -    35.0295356340001, -    35.0150424290001, -
                      97.239011654.           97.239011654.          97.223711786.          97.223711786.
498................  40.8356006820001, -     40.8404020610001, -    40.8404020610001, -    40.8356006820001, -
                      96.758767006.           96.758767006.          96.749174181.          96.749174181.
499................  33.7812372280001, -     33.8016134000001, -    33.8016134000001, -    33.7812372280001, -
                      118.067627933.          118.067627933.         118.032767969.         118.032767969.
500................  32.8597198360001, -     32.8630748340001, -    32.8630748340001, -    32.8597198360001, -
                      83.6073436619999.       83.6073436619999.      83.6039690959999.      83.6039690959999.
501................  39.636663701, -         39.721017576, -        39.721017576, -        39.636663701, -
                      92.534704178.           92.534704178.          92.464676968.          92.464676968.
502................  41.267041534, -         41.305913573, -        41.305913573, -        41.267041534, -
                      88.7046910729999.       88.7046910729999.      88.6608137729999.      88.6608137729999.
503................  29.426494618, -         29.437625079, -        29.437625079, -        29.426494618, -
                      98.3843199139999.       98.3843199139999.      98.3746227379999.      98.3746227379999.
504................  39.6487077620001, -     39.6734994180001, -    39.6734994180001, -    39.6487077620001, -
                      81.847046613.           81.847046613.          81.831592537.          81.831592537.
505................  44.9048285740001, -     44.9170262920001, -    44.9170262920001, -    44.9048285740001, -
                      123.003047071.          123.003047071.         122.995194144.         122.995194144.
506................  41.1829986970001, -     41.2049128990001, -    41.2049128990001, -    41.1829986970001, -
                      96.49160163.            96.49160163.           96.425755553.          96.425755553.
507................  43.7601885300001, -     43.7638707560001, -    43.7638707560001, -    43.7601885300001, -
                      98.047917175.           98.047917175.          98.039102093.          98.039102093.
508................  32.4031817050001, -     32.4082452810001, -    32.4082452810001, -    32.4031817050001, -
                      86.263631114.           86.263631114.          86.2557011.            86.2557011.

[[Page 1746]]

 
509................  36.1649285010001, -     36.2232305700001, -    36.2232305700001, -    36.1649285010001, -
                      78.833628877.           78.833628877.          78.75963967.           78.75963967.
510................  37.81235573, -          37.828354979, -        37.828354979, -        37.81235573, -
                      94.3097107569999.       94.3097107569999.      94.2731087829999.      94.2731087829999.
511................  36.7579974450001, -     36.8328900980001, -    36.8328900980001, -    36.7579974450001, -
                      94.387727354.           94.387727354.          94.326852463.          94.326852463.
512................  42.5267790020001, -     42.5603767370001, -    42.5603767370001, -    42.5267790020001, -
                      71.08203514.            71.08203514.           71.063291358.          71.063291358.
513................  39.4912259380001, -     39.5046787930001, -    39.5046787930001, -    39.4912259380001, -
                      76.8607346809999.       76.8607346809999.      76.8318924949999.      76.8318924949999.
514................  46.1080148720001, -     46.1501140200001, -    46.1501140200001, -    46.1080148720001, -
                      123.964495138.          123.964495138.         123.92502133.          123.92502133.
515................  17.9872158480001, -     18.0695436220001, -    18.0695436220001, -    17.9872158480001, -
                      66.333706182.           66.333706182.          66.240579825.          66.240579825.
516................  33.780577163, -         33.807394959, -        33.807394959, -        33.780577163, -
                      82.2952040439999.       82.2952040439999.      82.26292394.           82.26292394.
517................  46.6005921770001, -     46.6592451280001, -    46.6592451280001, -    46.6005921770001, -
                      112.190250013.          112.190250013.         112.094472322.         112.094472322.
518................  39.423596381, -         39.439023401, -        39.439023401, -        39.423596381, -
                      76.51081268.            76.51081268.           76.496156333.          76.496156333.
519................  46.220510372, -         46.337394743, -        46.337394743, -        46.220510372, -
                      111.635118944.          111.635118944.         111.504109039.         111.504109039.
520................  42.1437413450001, -     42.4788211760001, -    42.4788211760001, -    42.1437413450001, -
                      104.948278987.          104.948278987.         104.703889369.         104.703889369.
521................  35.656031539, -         35.664828514, -        35.664828514, -        35.656031539, -
                      95.375341077.           95.375341077.          95.369972431.          95.369972431.
522................  36.0958233040001, -     36.1023428190001, -    36.1023428190001, -    36.0958233040001, -
                      86.7615681459999.       86.7615681459999.      86.7562354.            86.7562354.
523................  40.9786701780001, -     40.9800945050001, -    40.9800945050001, -    40.9786701780001, -
                      80.325759923.           80.325759923.          80.323839076.          80.323839076.
524................  35.2622862810001, -     35.2681205800001, -    35.2681205800001, -    35.2622862810001, -
                      97.4851407689999.       97.4851407689999.      97.4768490759999.      97.4768490759999.
525................  33.6157453390001, -     33.6193347170001, -    33.6193347170001, -    33.6157453390001, -
                      84.3128273029999.       84.3128273029999.      84.3074772369999.      84.3074772369999.
526................  33.4618850200001, -     33.4727567890001, -    33.4727567890001, -    33.4618850200001, -
                      111.969623276.          111.969623276.         111.952212294.         111.952212294.
527................  32.6578846960001, -     32.6688813430001, -    32.6688813430001, -    32.6578846960001, -
                      111.495190228.          111.495190228.         111.481955968.         111.481955968.
528................  35.804791455, -         35.81355058, -         35.81355058, -         35.804791455, -
                      78.715406802.           78.715406802.          78.707216709.          78.707216709.
529................  39.8002476090001, -     39.8098625370001, -    39.8098625370001, -    39.8002476090001, -
                      82.9570252779999.       82.9570252779999.      82.94567622.           82.94567622.
530................  35.3683435470001, -     35.3777845520001, -    35.3777845520001, -    35.3683435470001, -
                      106.65493619.           106.65493619.          106.648878128.         106.648878128.
531................  39.627394171, -         39.639382105, -        39.639382105, -        39.627394171, -
                      75.6147487649999.       75.6147487649999.      75.6006753489999.      75.6006753489999.
532................  43.9963073710001, -     43.9977499120001, -    43.9977499120001, -    43.9963073710001, -
                      92.433533997.           92.433533997.          92.428949024.          92.428949024.
533................  44.7463851480001, -     44.7488195410001, -    44.7488195410001, -    44.7463851480001, -
                      93.12881708.            93.12881708.           93.125978095.          93.125978095.
534................  32.284284584, -         32.295043619, -        32.295043619, -        32.284284584, -
                      86.3990584479999.       86.3990584479999.      86.392323549.          86.392323549.
535................  32.847954014, -         32.861579522, -        32.861579522, -        32.847954014, -
                      97.3530685539999.       97.3530685539999.      97.3432426939999.      97.3432426939999.
536................  37.030464438, -         37.037578732, -        37.037578732, -        37.030464438, -
                      113.549169301.          113.549169301.         113.544639.            113.544639.
537................  38.7817203050001, -     38.7897490390001, -    38.7897490390001, -    38.7817203050001, -
                      97.642976177.           97.642976177.          97.633242512.          97.633242512.
538................  37.49085725, -          37.498350787, -        37.498350787, -        37.49085725, -
                      77.3171608389999.       77.3171608389999.      77.3077128829999.      77.3077128829999.
539................  35.5622835610001, -     35.5754168170001, -    35.5754168170001, -    35.5622835610001, -
                      106.10286838.           106.10286838.          106.071788538.         106.071788538.
540................  40.1177429000001, -     40.1299027480001, -    40.1299027480001, -    40.1177429000001, -
                      74.044914025.           74.044914025.          74.030081087.          74.030081087.
541................  39.576923987, -         39.580378098, -        39.580378098, -        39.576923987, -
                      85.816200007.           85.816200007.          85.807738311.          85.807738311.
542................  32.519546491, -         32.527987523, -        32.527987523, -        32.519546491, -
                      111.340100133.          111.340100133.         111.325196238.         111.325196238.
543................  43.5730602740001, -     43.5983048400001, -    43.5983048400001, -    43.5730602740001, -
                      96.6930749859999.       96.6930749859999.      96.6759672029999.      96.6759672029999.
544................  25.9569713660001, -     25.9681289730001, -    25.9681289730001, -    25.9569713660001, -
                      80.31070355.            80.31070355.           80.298558922.          80.298558922.

[[Page 1747]]

 
545................  38.131120233, -         38.190313565, -        38.190313565, -        38.131120233, -
                      89.745599204.           89.745599204.          89.703313722.          89.703313722.
546................  40.1880831510001, -     40.1918052850001, -    40.1918052850001, -    40.1880831510001, -
                      75.561069736.           75.561069736.          75.552580986.          75.552580986.
547................  39.8160693520001, -     39.8306927080001, -    39.8306927080001, -    39.8160693520001, -
                      89.673473292.           89.673473292.          89.664369884.          89.664369884.
548................  37.2490490960001, -     37.2571610570001, -    37.2571610570001, -    37.2490490960001, -
                      93.395772062.           93.395772062.          93.384982394.          93.384982394.
549................  45.5372774640001, -     45.5419761270001, -    45.5419761270001, -    45.5372774640001, -
                      94.060060866.           94.060060866.          94.051145099.          94.051145099.
550................  45.5645070200001, -     45.5652420030001, -    45.5652420030001, -    45.5645070200001, -
                      94.179496597.           94.179496597.          94.175345802.          94.175345802.
551................  36.8110053980001, -     36.8227442360001, -    36.8227442360001, -    36.8110053980001, -
                      75.9894743689999.       75.9894743689999.      75.9659250589999.      75.9659250589999.
552................  41.3451753470001, -     41.3813569730001, -    41.3813569730001, -    41.3451753470001, -
                      72.293373883.           72.293373883.          72.253317667.          72.253317667.
553................  36.285694226, -         36.300130892, -        36.300130892, -        36.285694226, -
                      95.309758124.           95.309758124.          95.278470963.          95.278470963.
554................  43.2708696780001, -     43.2848092560001, -    43.2848092560001, -    43.2708696780001, -
                      71.1288204539999.       71.1288204539999.      71.1155219099999.      71.1155219099999.
555................  44.4965394450001, -     44.5034995140001, -    44.5034995140001, -    44.4965394450001, -
                      73.168838485.           73.168838485.          73.160140825.          73.160140825.
556................  44.442952367, -         44.500157333, -        44.500157333, -        44.442952367, -
                      72.960320316.           72.960320316.          72.836710736.          72.836710736.
557................  38.546453582, -         38.556080633, -        38.556080633, -        38.546453582, -
                      92.080098162.           92.080098162.          92.055385571.          92.055385571.
558................  19.696784098, -         19.715068265, -        19.715068265, -        19.696784098, -
                      155.052848025.          155.052848025.         155.023635733.         155.023635733.
559................  36.8796769900001, -     36.9046015270001, -    36.9046015270001, -    36.8796769900001, -
                      90.310798339.           90.310798339.          90.255783907.          90.255783907.
560................  39.441791832, -         39.464465755, -        39.464465755, -        39.441791832, -
                      79.6837218599999.       79.6837218599999.      79.6475069149999.      79.6475069149999.
561................  34.9067538520001, -     34.9506642170001, -    34.9506642170001, -    34.9067538520001, -
                      85.070727678.           85.070727678.          85.045031881.          85.045031881.
562................  35.814732012, -         35.923989023, -        35.923989023, -        35.814732012, -
                      88.7542933719999.       88.7542933719999.      88.6437411839999.      88.6437411839999.
563................  36.006276454, -         36.027518046, -        36.027518046, -        36.006276454, -
                      86.516501852.           86.516501852.          86.492335009.          86.492335009.
564................  44.067527784, -         44.0784787400001, -    44.0784787400001, -    44.067527784, -
                      103.325214534.          103.325214534.         103.287313773.         103.287313773.
565................  43.0833898060001, -     43.0889316040001, -    43.0889316040001, -    43.0833898060001, -
                      72.4562338169999.       72.4562338169999.      72.4474520169999.      72.4474520169999.
566................  37.2459669690001, -     37.3155568590001, -    37.3155568590001, -    37.2459669690001, -
                      87.264708566.           87.264708566.          87.143105234.          87.143105234.
567................  39.3487643610001, -     39.3590411380001, -    39.3590411380001, -    39.3487643610001, -
                      81.448406511.           81.448406511.          81.437125672.          81.437125672.
568................  43.230983715, -         43.244098627, -        43.244098627, -        43.230983715, -
                      78.987693814.           78.987693814.          78.957641634.          78.957641634.
569................  38.414110285, -         38.51933631, -         38.51933631, -         38.414110285, -
                      90.4008158519999.       90.4008158519999.      89.8873624389999.      89.8873624389999.
570................  43.1058774480001, -     43.1213964380001, -    43.1213964380001, -    43.1058774480001, -
                      78.9722862359999.       78.9722862359999.      78.9269798539999.      78.9269798539999.
571................  38.8465829040001, -     38.8511023340001, -    38.8511023340001, -    38.8465829040001, -
                      76.9406129989999.       76.9406129989999.      76.9338436309999.      76.9338436309999.
572................  36.799812242, -         36.806581273, -        36.806581273, -        36.799812242, -
                      76.299262352.           76.299262352.          76.291663588.          76.291663588.
573................  36.824516203, -         36.82654125, -         36.82654125, -         36.824516203, -
                      76.2911109619999.       76.2911109619999.      76.2870895149999.      76.2870895149999.
574................  31.0389879680001, -     31.0572498550001, -    31.0572498550001, -    31.0389879680001, -
                      87.076766692.           87.076766692.          87.053283792.          87.053283792.
575................  30.486569113, -         30.523283452, -        30.523283452, -        30.486569113, -
                      86.966743959.           86.966743959.          86.940434633.          86.940434633.
576................  31.4033835660001, -     31.4251772980001, -    31.4251772980001, -    31.4033835660001, -
                      87.057347927.           87.057347927.          87.022039826.          87.022039826.
577................  30.417555556, -         30.432862018, -        30.432862018, -        30.417555556, -
                      86.9026103099999.       86.9026103099999.      86.8837180249999.      86.8837180249999.
578................  30.599791442, -         30.619098213, -        30.619098213, -        30.599791442, -
                      86.950876547.           86.950876547.          86.9265002429999.      86.9265002429999.
579................  30.5546267450001, -     30.5687059560001, -    30.5687059560001, -    30.5546267450001, -
                      87.8164634139999.       87.8164634139999.      87.8015463849999.      87.8015463849999.
580................  30.617963515, -         30.632703528, -        30.632703528, -        30.617963515, -
                      87.148395847.           87.148395847.          87.131141293.          87.131141293.

[[Page 1748]]

 
581................  30.499075884, -         30.520323757, -        30.520323757, -        30.499075884, -
                      87.6626447849999.       87.6626447849999.      87.6311911829999.      87.6311911829999.
582................  30.338386572, -         30.351971261, -        30.351971261, -        30.338386572, -
                      87.5495986079999.       87.5495986079999.      87.5332728869999.      87.5332728869999.
583................  35.3381397860001, -     35.3503400000001, -    35.3503400000001, -    35.3381397860001, -
                      89.875828209.           89.875828209.          89.848676466.          89.848676466.
584................  36.535830635, -         36.580439287, -        36.580439287, -        36.535830635, -
                      76.292027831.           76.292027831.          76.243039727.          76.243039727.
585................  33.891359251, -         33.894991619, -        33.894991619, -        33.891359251, -
                      118.072946629.          118.072946629.         118.067394654.         118.067394654.
586................  38.3285014350001, -     38.3442330700001, -    38.3442330700001, -    38.3285014350001, -
                      76.4841629759999.       76.4841629759999.      76.4639193759999.      76.4639193759999.
587................  43.077684909, -         43.082196982, -        43.082196982, -        43.077684909, -
                      73.823802707.           73.823802707.          73.818216923.          73.818216923.
588................  18.4266523270001, -     18.4276186450001, -    18.4276186450001, -    18.4266523270001, -
                      66.188700669.           66.188700669.          66.187788338.          66.187788338.
589................  35.086256399, -         35.090263498, -        35.090263498, -        35.086256399, -
                      90.1438097929999.       90.1438097929999.      90.138466962.          90.138466962.
590................  42.4740966470001, -     42.4801271500001, -    42.4801271500001, -    42.4740966470001, -
                      71.292022302.           71.292022302.          71.286586841.          71.286586841.
591................  41.0982621430001, -     41.1364452900001, -    41.1364452900001, -    41.0982621430001, -
                      95.9280611469999.       95.9280611469999.      95.8780365989999.      95.8780365989999.
592................  32.7452306660001, -     32.7528565660001, -    32.7528565660001, -    32.7452306660001, -
                      117.200217282.          117.200217282.         117.192605845.         117.192605845.
593................  32.783231948, -         32.814254912, -        32.814254912, -        32.783231948, -
                      88.8532491779999.       88.8532491779999.      88.8124127399999.      88.8124127399999.
594................  30.37231968, -          30.394059181, -        30.394059181, -        30.37231968, -
                      87.429057305.           87.429057305.          87.396697185.          87.396697185.
595................  48.1708872200001, -     48.2120255960001, -    48.2120255960001, -    48.1708872200001, -
                      122.648186576.          122.648186576.         122.615173447.         122.615173447.
596................  30.338350216, -         30.377897748, -        30.377897748, -        30.338350216, -
                      81.889129182.           81.889129182.          81.84492402.           81.84492402.
597................  70.488162834, -         70.509905742, -        70.509905742, -        70.488162834, -
                      149.926235024.          149.926235024.         149.855544128.         149.855544128.
598................  43.098523582, -         43.37173967, -         43.37173967, -         43.098523582, -
                      116.31428757.           116.31428757.          115.957075202.         115.957075202.
599................  38.0231563570001, -     38.0284346090001, -    38.0284346090001, -    38.0231563570001, -
                      122.170412652.          122.170412652.         122.162692799.         122.162692799.
600................  21.979075729, -         22.073530219, -        22.073530219, -        21.979075729, -
                      159.787895529.          159.787895529.         159.750843749.         159.750843749.
601................  37.709457716, -         37.747451286, -        37.747451286, -        37.709457716, -
                      121.91515472.           121.91515472.          121.871676143.         121.871676143.
602................  28.2124892410001, -     28.2719774110001, -    28.2719774110001, -    28.2124892410001, -
                      80.6189925959999.       80.6189925959999.      80.5967212699999.      80.5967212699999.
603................  21.3812730710001, -     21.3857579590001, -    21.3857579590001, -    21.3812730710001, -
                      157.972837384.          157.972837384.         157.969830103.         157.969830103.
604................  43.0830098340001, -     43.095680228, -        43.095680228, -        43.0830098340001, -
                      70.8265315799999.       70.8265315799999.      70.8118178159999.      70.8118178159999.
605................  38.8665872170001, -     38.8804333410001, -    38.8804333410001, -    38.8665872170001, -
                      77.06187689.            77.06187689.           77.0457741439999.      77.0457741439999.
606................  38.805877954, -         38.838836254, -        38.838836254, -        38.805877954, -
                      104.720171001.          104.720171001.         104.673427575.         104.673427575.
607................  40.9140682660001, -     40.9956152640001, -    40.9956152640001, -    40.9140682660001, -
                      74.590780383.           74.590780383.          74.494014259.          74.494014259.
608................  18.26752057, -          18.26922761, -         18.26922761, -         18.26752057, -
                      65.759072139.           65.759072139.          65.757502273.          65.757502273.
609................  37.495160689, -         37.504255663, -        37.504255663, -        37.495160689, -
                      122.500638613.          122.500638613.         122.494186302.         122.494186302.
610................  34.2702027120001, -     34.3785932240001, -    34.3785932240001, -    34.2702027120001, -
                      92.13996888.            92.13996888.           92.033468658.          92.033468658.
611................  18.2467234310001, -     18.2570859030001, -    18.2570859030001, -    18.2467234310001, -
                      65.600381523.           65.600381523.          65.5822592889999.      65.5822592889999.
612................  37.339590329, -         37.644554428, -        37.644554428, -        37.339590329, -
                      104.173059108.          104.173059108.         103.576450075.         103.576450075.
613................  40.489967456, -         40.497923194, -        40.497923194, -        40.489967456, -
                      80.215160815.           80.215160815.          80.205677052.          80.205677052.
614................  40.4899753650001, -     40.4979311050001, -    40.4979311050001, -    40.4899753650001, -
                      80.215361211.           80.215361211.          80.205680084.          80.205680084.
615................  19.580002141, -         19.935340889, -        19.935340889, -        19.580002141, -
                      155.753584385.          155.753584385.         155.482149063.         155.482149063.
616................  33.737668318, -         33.849728431, -        33.849728431, -        33.737668318, -
                      80.5168304859999.       80.5168304859999.      80.4450008049999.      80.4450008049999.

[[Page 1749]]

 
617................  38.887515787, -         38.895551718, -        38.895551718, -        38.887515787, -
                      123.552272552.          123.552272552.         123.538718114.         123.538718114.
618................  71.323665191, -         71.336534761, -        71.336534761, -        71.323665191, -
                      156.649567453.          156.649567453.         156.601540334.         156.601540334.
619................  45.57436111, -          45.583315392, -        45.583315392, -        45.57436111, -
                      122.604832246.          122.604832246.         122.585382407.         122.585382407.
620................  42.9087822710001, -     43.0870732990001, -    43.0870732990001, -    42.9087822710001, -
                      71.4221747879999.       71.4221747879999.      70.722436956.          70.722436956.
621................  36.594597106, -         36.608467628, -        36.608467628, -        36.594597106, -
                      121.926941695.          121.926941695.         121.894607972.         121.894607972.
622................  38.263930139, -         38.360999196, -        38.360999196, -        38.263930139, -
                      104.386297178.          104.386297178.         104.275724057.         104.275724057.
623................  38.290060253, -         38.31683736, -         38.31683736, -         38.290060253, -
                      77.0671300829999.       77.0671300829999.      77.0170631189999.      77.0170631189999.
624................  21.3139823400001, -     21.3226045200001, -    21.3226045200001, -    21.3139823400001, -
                      157.992793478.          157.992793478.         157.982066252.         157.982066252.
625................  41.5907533440001, -     41.6007626130001, -    41.6007626130001, -    41.5907533440001, -
                      71.42348666.            71.42348666.           71.41187911.           71.41187911.
626................  37.163382287, -         37.207412609, -        37.207412609, -        37.163382287, -
                      80.5791188709999.       80.5791188709999.      80.5101282629999.      80.5101282629999.
627................  18.5087916470001, -     18.5101598370001, -    18.5101598370001, -    18.5087916470001, -
                      67.099861576.           67.099861576.          67.098621282.          67.098621282.
628................  33.397278645, -         33.464838472, -        33.464838472, -        33.397278645, -
                      94.4116859869999.       94.4116859869999.      94.3047919909999.      94.3047919909999.
629................  44.9551877580001, -     45.0169721250001, -    45.0169721250001, -    44.9551877580001, -
                      70.513638005.           70.513638005.          70.379987151.          70.379987151.
630................  34.550284843, -         34.710900354, -        34.710900354, -        34.550284843, -
                      86.7237782349999.       86.7237782349999.      86.5815630549999.      86.5815630549999.
631................  39.4978523080001, -     39.5024544730001, -    39.5024544730001, -    39.4978523080001, -
                      119.778804811.          119.778804811.         119.771926612.         119.771926612.
632................  39.806889794, -         39.819444408, -        39.819444408, -        39.806889794, -
                      82.949783742.           82.949783742.          82.937417355.          82.937417355.
633................  38.1508457090001, -     38.1586875990001, -    38.1586875990001, -    38.1508457090001, -
                      78.418005901.           78.418005901.          78.409329548.          78.409329548.
634................  37.7110124880001, -     37.7227924600001, -    37.7227924600001, -    37.7110124880001, -
                      120.921809782.          120.921809782.         120.9168393.           120.9168393.
635................  32.5734846130001, -     32.6644753900001, -    32.6644753900001, -    32.5734846130001, -
                      83.613041736.           83.613041736.          83.555394419.          83.555394419.
636................  41.5101975790001, -     41.5236820390001, -    41.5236820390001, -    41.5101975790001, -
                      90.566624136.           90.566624136.          90.515679261.          90.515679261.
637................  39.816797712, -         39.895272909, -        39.895272909, -        39.816797712, -
                      104.880637268.          104.880637268.         104.796958344.         104.796958344.
638................  61.756264087, -         61.799913075, -        61.799913075, -        61.756264087, -
                      166.062507434.          166.062507434.         165.913701567.         165.913701567.
639................  43.2183336890001, -     43.2263537340001, -    43.2263537340001, -    43.2183336890001, -
                      75.415282906.           75.415282906.          75.407014028.          75.407014028.
640................  39.762626991, -         39.769793541, -        39.769793541, -        39.762626991, -
                      94.904952104.           94.904952104.          94.897835881.          94.897835881.
641................  31.3342942350001, -     31.3453725330001, -    31.3453725330001, -    31.3342942350001, -
                      86.0977289259999.       86.0977289259999.      86.085558079.          86.085558079.
642................  40.7838318330001, -     40.7949147800001, -    40.7949147800001, -    40.7838318330001, -
                      111.959489583.          111.959489583.         111.953751907.         111.953751907.
643................  32.8003673640001, -     33.0377362220001, -    33.0377362220001, -    32.8003673640001, -
                      118.606292107.          118.606292107.         118.348994062.         118.348994062.
644................  33.2121599560001, -     33.29062044, -         33.29062044, -         33.2121599560001, -
                      119.582134532.          119.582134532.         119.418213784.         119.418213784.
645................  33.7662733170001, -     33.7813000720001, -    33.7813000720001, -    33.7662733170001, -
                      118.309268541.          118.309268541.         118.293960351.         118.293960351.
646................  33.991029047, -         33.997444378, -        33.997444378, -        33.991029047, -
                      119.635878529.          119.635878529.         119.625797527.         119.625797527.
647................  30.458179069, -         30.481667064, -        30.481667064, -        30.458179069, -
                      87.351595059.           87.351595059.          87.33104122.           87.33104122.
648................  42.1757726720001, -     42.284196191, -        42.284196191, -        42.1757726720001, -
                      90.4077834729999.       90.4077834729999.      90.2282601739999.      90.2282601739999.
649................  32.119801635, -         32.13505162, -         32.13505162, -         32.119801635, -
                      81.1976294959999.       81.1976294959999.      81.1837630719999.      81.1837630719999.
650................  42.5925001000001, -     42.8511848830001, -    42.8511848830001, -    42.5925001000001, -
                      115.678838723.          115.678838723.         115.453730372.         115.453730372.
651................  42.8436851000001, -     42.8583933770001, -    42.8583933770001, -    42.8436851000001, -
                      73.932567765.           73.932567765.          73.917508999.          73.917508999.
652................  38.7843530810001, -     38.8241032480001, -    38.8241032480001, -    38.7843530810001, -
                      104.551986183.          104.551986183.         104.48867271.          104.48867271.

[[Page 1750]]

 
653................  38.524439918, -         38.558372905, -        38.558372905, -        38.524439918, -
                      89.882877352.           89.882877352.          89.822791153.          89.822791153.
654................  41.402655098, -         41.405858099, -        41.405858099, -        41.402655098, -
                      75.6679100109999.       75.6679100109999.      75.6641420559999.      75.6641420559999.
655................  36.9172616480001, -     36.9234795100001, -    36.9234795100001, -    36.9172616480001, -
                      76.320386974.           76.320386974.          76.310890414.          76.310890414.
656................  48.26740571, -          48.3084303770001, -    48.3084303770001, -    48.26740571, -
                      122.645903557.          122.645903557.         122.555529232.         122.555529232.
657................  42.5944000000001, -     42.6303400000001, -    42.6303400000001, -    42.5944000000001, -
                      82.8511999999999.       82.8511999999999.      82.8038799999999.      82.8038799999999.
658................  36.237894413, -         36.250497998, -        36.250497998, -        36.237894413, -
                      119.894821285.          119.894821285.         119.869682611.         119.869682611.
659................  60.1318770720001, -     60.1347511870001, -    60.1347511870001, -    60.1318770720001, -
                      149.434449035.          149.434449035.         149.431802327.         149.431802327.
660................  35.3214638170001, -     35.368940398, -        35.368940398, -        35.3214638170001, -
                      77.997073351.           77.997073351.          77.930639313.          77.930639313.
661................  33.9530524190001, -     33.9954038330001, -    33.9954038330001, -    33.9530524190001, -
                      80.494323712.           80.494323712.          80.441564645.          80.441564645.
662................  31.3582318730001, -     31.3677829840001, -    31.3677829840001, -    31.3582318730001, -
                      85.856088056.           85.856088056.          85.84143832.           85.84143832.
663................  33.956330827, -         34.017271784, -        34.017271784, -        33.956330827, -
                      98.528137592.           98.528137592.          98.4775551939999.      98.4775551939999.
664................  40.1402214060001, -     40.2702161240001, -    40.2702161240001, -    40.1402214060001, -
                      120.185906595.          120.185906595.         120.074522544.         120.074522544.
665................  32.585610327, -         32.609517949, -        32.609517949, -        32.585610327, -
                      117.134530157.          117.134530157.         117.121573696.         117.121573696.
666................  42.3865801530001, -     42.3986855140001, -    42.3986855140001, -    42.3865801530001, -
                      96.377733927.           96.377733927.          96.3700527519999.      96.3700527519999.
667................  31.2790279390001, -     31.2921867390001, -    31.2921867390001, -    31.2790279390001, -
                      86.135253897.           86.135253897.          86.12630462.           86.12630462.
668................  38.5971126590001, -     38.7549420740001, -    38.7549420740001, -    38.5971126590001, -
                      97.891769008.           97.891769008.          97.731700038.          97.731700038.
669................  32.665275626, -         32.670651139, -        32.670651139, -        32.665275626, -
                      117.245056924.          117.245056924.         117.237168313.         117.237168313.
670................  61.088401402, -         61.118439774, -        61.118439774, -        61.088401402, -
                      155.608677328.          155.608677328.         155.558809541.         155.558809541.
671................  39.8435710260001, -     39.8525313250001, -    39.8525313250001, -    39.8435710260001, -
                      83.84415892.            83.84415892.           83.827046603.          83.827046603.
672................  36.7792288150001, -     36.7960357240001, -    36.7960357240001, -    36.7792288150001, -
                      76.316870104.           76.316870104.          76.304641406.          76.304641406.
673................  38.5886024650001, -     38.5936509870001, -    38.5936509870001, -    38.5886024650001, -
                      90.211334345.           90.211334345.          90.205345975.          90.205345975.
674................  41.491597375, -         41.493603532, -        41.493603532, -        41.491597375, -
                      74.096301663.           74.096301663.          74.09231513.           74.09231513.
675................  41.4957478590001, -     41.5071142860001, -    41.5071142860001, -    41.4957478590001, -
                      74.093456875.           74.093456875.          74.076705335.          74.076705335.
676................  31.3556919110001, -     31.3632965050001, -    31.3632965050001, -    31.3556919110001, -
                      86.019020089.           86.019020089.          86.009368893.          86.009368893.
677................  38.5366165980001, -     38.5562248710001, -    38.5562248710001, -    38.5366165980001, -
                      77.2462204349999.       77.2462204349999.      77.1968327609999.      77.1968327609999.
678................  43.093425804, -         43.105369507, -        43.105369507, -        43.093425804, -
                      76.13209217.            76.13209217.           76.117106326.          76.117106326.
679................  31.1194852620001, -     31.1263987840001, -    31.1263987840001, -    31.1194852620001, -
                      85.983038227.           85.983038227.          85.975130114.          85.975130114.
680................  32.90171336, -          33.00155658, -         33.00155658, -         32.90171336, -
                      115.830667748.          115.830667748.         115.679781585.         115.679781585.
681................  62.864848431, -         62.942582989, -        62.942582989, -        62.864848431, -
                      156.051764799.          156.051764799.         155.664968137.         155.664968137.
682................  32.418304849, -         32.912746437, -        32.912746437, -        32.418304849, -
                      113.683744005.          113.683744005.         112.306115231.         112.306115231.
683................  38.9884924360001, -     39.0140804660001, -    39.0140804660001, -    38.9884924360001, -
                      105.010363219.          105.010363219.         104.991241919.         104.991241919.
684................  65.5522801760001, -     65.5830229910001, -    65.5830229910001, -    65.5522801760001, -
                      168.013053723.          168.013053723.         167.912258962.         167.912258962.
685................  35.384500001, -         35.4497, -             35.4497, -             35.384500001, -
                      97.4236999999999.       97.4236999999999.      97.3502865429999.      97.3502865429999.
686................  41.1825353090001, -     41.2131432310001, -    41.2131432310001, -    41.1825353090001, -
                      75.443820828.           75.443820828.          75.411887882.          75.411887882.
687................  41.58166204, -          41.59389898, -         41.59389898, -         41.58166204, -
                      83.799456627.           83.799456627.          83.786432604.          83.786432604.
688................  40.2607276530001, -     40.5755204400001, -    40.5755204400001, -    40.2607276530001, -
                      112.497273742.          112.497273742.         112.279088302.         112.279088302.

[[Page 1751]]

 
689................  31.2251159510001, -     31.2323695170001, -    31.2323695170001, -    31.2251159510001, -
                      85.564347313.           85.564347313.          85.553616915.          85.553616915.
690................  31.3753255780001, -     31.6654206230001, -    31.6654206230001, -    31.3753255780001, -
                      81.894810498.           81.894810498.          81.52596687.           81.52596687.
691................  38.231289094, -         38.294736015, -        38.294736015, -        38.231289094, -
                      121.98346892.           121.98346892.          121.881230384.         121.881230384.
692................  38.3228969080001, -     38.3283655290001, -    38.3283655290001, -    38.3228969080001, -
                      121.933846122.          121.933846122.         121.915378048.         121.915378048.
693................  21.351128573, -         21.367812054, -        21.367812054, -        21.351128573, -
                      157.898178476.          157.898178476.         157.879404163.         157.879404163.
694................  21.4642480200001, -     21.5218182430001, -    21.5218182430001, -    21.4642480200001, -
                      158.148373992.          158.148373992.         157.901772211.         157.901772211.
695................  43.1244504040001, -     43.1368306370001, -    43.1368306370001, -    43.1244504040001, -
                      89.341539911.           89.341539911.          89.328466326.          89.328466326.
696................  24.5433363610001, -     24.5555222860001, -    24.5555222860001, -    24.5433363610001, -
                      81.811655077.           81.811655077.          81.797521593.          81.797521593.
697................  24.5614307340001, -     24.5672092190001, -    24.5672092190001, -    24.5614307340001, -
                      81.798222455.           81.798222455.          81.782640081.          81.782640081.
698................  32.127406367, -         32.133937736, -        32.133937736, -        32.127406367, -
                      110.955077243.          110.955077243.         110.945092818.         110.945092818.
699................  36.2121647440001, -     36.2203832320001, -    36.2203832320001, -    36.2121647440001, -
                      95.878742446.           95.878742446.          95.868966625.          95.868966625.
700................  45.07910944, -          45.104247148, -        45.104247148, -        45.07910944, -
                      93.181911062.           93.181911062.          93.166136656.          93.166136656.
701................  29.953597589, -         30.141953697, -        30.141953697, -        29.953597589, -
                      85.6870879419999.       85.6870879419999.      85.444996611.          85.444996611.
702................  38.983678555, -         38.992477092, -        38.992477092, -        38.983678555, -
                      76.5010465079999.       76.5010465079999.      76.4868322629999.      76.4868322629999.
703................  21.469739594, -         21.479496623, -        21.479496623, -        21.469739594, -
                      158.057058607.          158.057058607.         158.050204602.         158.050204602.
704................  38.750330283, -         38.795708158, -        38.795708158, -        38.750330283, -
                      104.304283339.          104.304283339.         104.298582551.         104.298582551.
705................  38.9545078850001, -     39.0421097770001, -    39.0421097770001, -    38.9545078850001, -
                      104.910763947.          104.910763947.         104.830835276.         104.830835276.
706................  33.2114718620001, -     33.2146081990001, -    33.2146081990001, -    33.2114718620001, -
                      117.39895734.           117.39895734.          117.395706525.         117.395706525.
707................  40.339366355, -         41.187663286, -        41.187663286, -        40.339366355, -
                      114.13239866.           114.13239866.          112.775026182.         112.775026182.
708................  36.3075026230001, -     36.3645349300001, -    36.3645349300001, -    36.3075026230001, -
                      97.932652751.           97.932652751.          97.890961956.          97.890961956.
709................  34.5107894400001, -     34.9069803380001, -    34.9069803380001, -    34.5107894400001, -
                      120.645844615.          120.645844615.         120.439765984.         120.439765984.
710................  43.125429819, -         43.128384246, -        43.128384246, -        43.125429819, -
                      75.5932489149999.       75.5932489149999.      75.5892130629999.      75.5892130629999.
711................  18.093746783, -         18.099320238, -        18.099320238, -        18.093746783, -
                      65.5171222009999.       65.5171222009999.      65.5081834699999.      65.5081834699999.
712................  43.9198868560001, -     44.2491740180001, -    44.2491740180001, -    43.9198868560001, -
                      90.281512146.           90.281512146.          89.9961840639999.      89.9961840639999.
713................  42.308018614, -         42.319058737, -        42.319058737, -        42.308018614, -
                      85.261730616.           85.261730616.          85.241088866.          85.241088866.
714................  43.1194738070001, -     43.1294331440001, -    43.1294331440001, -    43.1194738070001, -
                      87.9811739899999.       87.9811739899999.      87.969765633.          87.969765633.
715................  21.444134852, -         21.449106118, -        21.449106118, -        21.444134852, -
                      158.193880164.          158.193880164.         158.188834873.         158.188834873.
716................  33.30623532, -          33.348258648, -        33.348258648, -        33.30623532, -
                      116.726204555.          116.726204555.         116.681746107.         116.681746107.
717................  40.416741642, -         40.428227856, -        40.428227856, -        40.416741642, -
                      74.074863319.           74.074863319.          74.066019589.          74.066019589.
718................  42.715762833, -         42.723757367, -        42.723757367, -        42.715762833, -
                      73.715197659.           73.715197659.          73.7014418059999.      73.7014418059999.
719................  38.131610059, -         38.158782096, -        38.158782096, -        38.131610059, -
                      76.4415151439999.       76.4415151439999.      76.4141914209999.      76.4141914209999.
720................  29.9448494910001, -     29.9527562370001, -    29.9527562370001, -    29.9448494910001, -
                      90.0376652149999.       90.0376652149999.      90.028618848.          90.028618848.
721................  39.905374947, -         40.419222199, -        40.419222199, -        39.905374947, -
                      113.701870713.          113.701870713.         112.723055564.         112.723055564.
722................  41.3164009720001, -     41.4138497160001, -    41.4138497160001, -    41.3164009720001, -
                      74.104566558.           74.104566558.          73.950569356.          73.950569356.
723................  42.1732117120001, -     42.2183966200001, -    42.2183966200001, -    42.1732117120001, -
                      72.560346443.           72.560346443.          72.513149263.          72.513149263.
724................  21.4548202730001, -     21.4906567190001, -    21.4906567190001, -    21.4548202730001, -
                      158.05113405.           158.05113405.          158.023893229.         158.023893229.

[[Page 1752]]

 
725................  47.6996152880001, -     47.7046436220001, -    47.7046436220001, -    47.6996152880001, -
                      117.582780473.          117.582780473.         117.571913796.         117.571913796.
726................  32.3256631690001, -     33.9110868210001, -    33.9110868210001, -    32.3256631690001, -
                      106.751912813.          106.751912813.         106.097200035.         106.097200035.
727................  38.7024149040001, -     38.7611248150001, -    38.7611248150001, -    38.7024149040001, -
                      93.5961699699999.       93.5961699699999.      93.530993696.          93.530993696.
728................  35.403434766, -         35.411418204, -        35.411418204, -        35.403434766, -
                      97.615579224.           97.615579224.          97.607653269.          97.607653269.
729................  30.5215171080001, -     30.5592917870001, -    30.5592917870001, -    30.5215171080001, -
                      88.98512068.            88.98512068.           88.952736979.          88.952736979.
730................  39.7790113880001, -     39.8514988460001, -    39.8514988460001, -    39.7790113880001, -
                      84.122505244.           84.122505244.          84.013795999.          84.013795999.
731................  28.235254233, -         28.257299957, -        28.257299957, -        28.235254233, -
                      98.748507381.           98.748507381.          98.699312525.          98.699312525.
732................  34.8723464400001, -     34.9011810040001, -    34.9011810040001, -    34.8723464400001, -
                      116.88720812.           116.88720812.          116.849270991.         116.849270991.
733................  37.211273261, -         37.220744848, -        37.220744848, -        37.211273261, -
                      76.4914782399999.       76.4914782399999.      76.4804938719999.      76.4804938719999.
734................  41.2592384490001, -     41.2720857920001, -    41.2720857920001, -    41.2592384490001, -
                      80.6956297689999.       80.6956297689999.      80.6669307879999.      80.6669307879999.
735................  64.7319686270001, -     64.8134110040001, -    64.8134110040001, -    64.7319686270001, -
                      147.051773314.          147.051773314.         146.755123322.         146.755123322.
736................  32.765238373, -         33.551544978, -        33.551544978, -        32.765238373, -
                      114.588551663.          114.588551663.         113.648148435.         113.648148435.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


    Dated: December 26, 2024.
Matthew G. Olsen,
Assistant Attorney General for National Security, U.S. Department of 
Justice.
[FR Doc. 2024-31486 Filed 1-3-25; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 4410-PF-P

