[Congressional Record Volume 168, Number 160 (Tuesday, October 4, 2022)]
[Extensions of Remarks]
[Page E1019]
From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov]





RECOGNITION OF WILLIAM EMMONS AND HIS SERVICE TO THE HOUSE COMMITTEE ON 
                             THE JUDICIARY

                                 ______
                                 

                          HON. JERROLD NADLER

                              of new york

                    in the house of representatives

                        Tuesday, October 4, 2022

  Mr. NADLER. Madam Speaker, I rise, along with Representative Steve 
Cohen, Chair of the Subcommittee on the Constitution, Civil Rights, and 
Civil Liberties, to thank William Emmons for his service to the 
Committee on the Judiciary.
  Will received his bachelor's degree from The College of William and 
Mary and began his career in public policy as a Legislative Intern for 
Representative Suzanne Bonamici. Will first joined the Judiciary 
Committee as an intern in 2018 and he returned in 2019 as Professional 
Staff Member for the Subcommittee on the Constitution, Civil Rights, 
and Civil Liberties.
  Will's work was essential to the success of much of the Constitution 
subcommittee's activities, including its 13 hearings on voting rights, 
two field hearings where he handled almost all of the logistical 
matters regarding transporting equipment and setting up hearing 
locations, and a number of other high-profile hearings like the one 
marking the 100th anniversary of the Tulsa race riots.
  Will assisted considerably with respect to helping various counsels 
involved in the first impeachment of Donald Trump and he also 
contributed substantive work product on important and politically 
sensitive matters, most notably with respect to researching the 
background on our hearing on Congressional authority over member 
conduct and discipline.
  Through it all, in demanding and stressful situations, he proved to 
be a smart, dedicated staffer who worked very hard on many critical but 
often unseen tasks with conscientiousness, grace, and good humor.
  For nearly four years, I have been fortunate to count Will among my 
staff. I, and the American people, have greatly benefited from his 
passion for public policy, his dedication to service, and his 
commitment to excellence. No doubt he will be successful in his future 
endeavors and an asset to his future colleagues.
  While we are sad to see Will go and he will certainly be missed, we 
are happy that he will continue to serve the public interest in his new 
non-profit role in New York.
  We thank William Emmons for his service to the Committee and wish him 
the best of luck with this new chapter.

                          ____________________

