[Congressional Record Volume 168, Number 157 (Wednesday, September 28, 2022)]
[Extensions of Remarks]
[Page E985]
From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov]




                 HONORING A CENTURY OF U.S.-ISRAEL TIES

                                 ______
                                 

                            HON. JOE WILSON

                           of south carolina

                    in the house of representatives

                     Wednesday, September 28, 2022

  Mr. WILSON of South Carolina. Madam Speaker, as the Ranking Member of 
the Foreign Affairs Middle East Subcommittee, it is a pleasure to 
recognize A Century of United States and Israel Ties.
  One hundred years ago, Senator Henry Cabot Lodge (R-MA) and 
Representative Hamilton Fish (R-NY) pushed a joint resolution through 
Congress for the United States to officially acknowledge their support 
for a Jewish homeland. The House and Senate vote was unanimous, and in 
September 1922, President Warren G. Harding signed the Resolution.
  Israel is a great friend, ally, and partner to the United States in 
our shared commitment to democracy, economic development, and regional 
security. The U.S.-Israel bond is unique, as it is the foundation of 
American leadership in the Middle East. In 1948, America was the first 
country to recognize Israel as a state and in 2018, America established 
an embassy in Jerusalem. I was grateful to lead the House Delegation 
for the Embassy opening fulfilling the courageous promise of President 
Donald Trump.
  A highlight of my service in Congress was when my wife Roxanne and I 
met with former Prime Minister Netanyahu in Jerusalem and Washington. 
Mr. Netanyahu significantly contributed to the strengthening of Israeli 
security, transitioning it into an economic force, respected 
internationally. I know firsthand of his extraordinary dedication to 
the people of Israel. The Israeli people have demonstrated resiliency, 
overcoming numerous challenges and enduring the threat of terrorism, 
while continuing to remain confident in the future of their country. 
They continue to lead the way in critical sectors of healthcare, 
information technology, and defense.
  I grew up with an appreciation of the Jewish faith in Charleston, 
South Carolina, where at the time of the American Revolution was home 
of the largest Jewish population in the New World. The provincial 
constitution of South Carolina was the first constitution to recognize 
Judaism as a religion. The first Jewish elected official in America was 
to the South Carolina Provincial Assembly, and sadly it was home of the 
first Jewish American killed in the Revolution.
  The people of Israel, and Prime Minister Yair Lapid, know they have a 
true ally in America. I continue to work toward the normalization of 
our Arab partners and Israel relations to achieve a more stable, 
peaceful, and prosperous Middle East in which all people and religions 
can coexist and prosper. I am grateful for the dedicated service of 
Ambassador to the U.S., Michael Herzog.

                          ____________________

