[Congressional Record Volume 168, Number 183 (Tuesday, November 29, 2022)]
[Extensions of Remarks]
[Pages E1184-E1185]
From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov]




RECOGNIZING RESOLUTION 181 75TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE UN GENERAL ASSEMBLY 
                                  VOTE

                                 ______
                                 

                            HON. JOE WILSON

                           of south carolina

                    in the house of representatives

                       Tuesday, November 29, 2022

  Mr. WILSON of South Carolina. Madam Speaker, today marks the 75th 
anniversary of the U.N. General Assembly vote on Resolution 181, also 
known as the partition plan. The resolution supported the creation of 
two independent states from Palestine, one Arab and one Jewish, at the 
end of the British Mandate.
  The adoption of this resolution laid the foundation for the creation 
of the modern Jewish State of Israel.
  The passage of the resolution came with strong U.S. leadership in 
helping garner the support necessary for its advancement, including 
from President Harry Truman who told the U.S. delegation to the U.N. to 
quote, ``get busy and get all the votes you can.''
  Members of this body, like Representative Sol Bloom, a former 
chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, also played a key 
role, reaching out to foreign nations and encouraging them to support 
the plan.
  The plan was not everything Jewish leaders wanted. It left Jerusalem 
outside of what would become Israel. But nonetheless, it was proudly 
accepted by the Jewish Agency and Zionist groups, while the Arab League 
and Palestinian leaders rejected this plan.
  I especially appreciate that today the United States fully recognizes 
Jerusalem as the capitol of Israel. On May 14, 2018, I led the House 
delegation for the opening the U.S. Embassy in Jerusalem with 
Ambassador David Friedman, welcomed by Prime Minister Benjamin 
Netanyahu. The re-location of the Embassy was the fulfilment of 
``promises made, promises kept'' by President Donald Trump. Senator 
Lindsey Graham led the Senate Delegation.
  Since that day, Palestinian rejectionism continues to limit the 
opportunity for peace. The Palestinians did not support a Palestinian 
state in 1947 because it would have meant accepting a Jewish state. To 
this day there are far too many Palestinians that refuse to accept 
Israel's right to exist and live in peace and security.
  As the ranking member of the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on 
the Middle East, North Africa and Global Counterterrorism, Co-Chairman 
of the House Republican Israel Caucus, and a veteran supporter of our 
democratic ally Israel, I am grateful to mark this historic 75th 
anniversary of the UN Partition Plan vote with a strong commitment to 
the U.S.-Israel relationship.
  Since its creation, the United States supported the Jewish State with 
bipartisan support from Congress, working to build a strong security, 
intelligence and defense relationship enshrined by shared values and 
mutually strategic interests. The United States Congress has worked to 
support our ally with annual security assistance, defense cooperation, 
and an emerging relationship in key areas including agriculture, hi-
tech and homeland security.
  Both our countries are committed to democracy and justice, and we 
continue to look for new ways to integrate Israel into the region, such 
as support for the historic Abraham Accords that normalized ties 
between Israel and

[[Page E1185]]

our Arab allies, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Morocco, and Sudan. 
Unlike the Palestinian leadership, I am encouraged to see these Arab 
nations suspend their continued rejection of Israel and work to 
integrate it into the region.
  While we continue to see the UN's deplorable efforts to isolate, 
condemn and excessively attack Israel, I celebrate one of the few 
positive things it has done in the Middle East--the historic 75th 
anniversary of the UN Partition Plan vote, guided by strong U.S. 
leadership.
  May the U.S.-Israel relationship continue to flourish for the next 75 
years and beyond, and may we continue to promote our shared interests 
supporting democracy, peace, and cooperation throughout the region.

                          ____________________

