[Congressional Record Volume 168, Number 135 (Friday, August 12, 2022)]
[Extensions of Remarks]
[Page E841]
From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov]




                           APPRECIATING INDIA

                                 ______
                                 

                            HON. JOE WILSON

                           of south carolina

                    in the house of representatives

                        Friday, August 12, 2022

  Mr. WILSON of South Carolina. Madam Speaker, August 15th is a 
significant date in world history as it marks the 75th Anniversary of 
the independence of the Republic of India. The landmark occasion is 
being celebrated as an historic democratic victory in a festival called 
Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav.
  America especially rejoices for the people of India as the world's 
oldest democracy celebrates the world's largest democracy. 2022 is 
especially significant as democracies (rule of law) are threatened by 
authoritarians (rule of gun), exemplified by war criminal Putin 
murderously invading Ukraine, the Chinese Communist Party threatening 
Taiwan, and Iranian theocrats chanting Death to Israel, Death to 
America. World chaos is also a threat to the people of India.
  As the son of a U.S. Army Air Corps member in the Flying Tigers who 
served in India and China, I grew up with an appreciation of the work 
ethic my father recognized in India. As a real estate attorney in South 
Carolina, I welcomed new investors who bought hotels and motels 
creating jobs across the state.
  In Congress I chaired the largest country Caucus, the Caucus of India 
and Indian Americans. I will be forever grateful to have been with 
Governor Nikki Haley (America's second Indian American Governor) to 
welcome Prime Minister Narendra Modi to Center Ring of Madison Square 
Garden in New York City. I was also on the escort committee for the 
Prime Minister's address to Congress. I was present with President 
Donald Trump for the historic 'Howdy Modi' celebration in Houston, 
Texas, with over 50,000 Indian-Americans in attendance. Additionally, I 
attended the Prime Minister's 2019 Independence Day address at the Red 
Fort in New Delhi, India.
  Over the years, I have had the opportunity to serve with the Consul 
General of India in Atlanta, Dr. Swati V. Kulkarni, who is passionate 
for the people of India.
  The 75th Anniversary is an opportunity for the shared values of India 
and America to be fulfilled. President Donald Trump correctly 
identified the Indo-Pacific Command as a way to promote Indian-U.S. 
military cooperation for Peace Through Strength. India's proven 
industrial capabilities provide an opportunity to reduce dependence on 
foreign military sales.
  The future is bright for the people of India and with our shared 
values of democracy, the future is bright for a strong alliance of 
India and America.

                          ____________________

