[Congressional Record Volume 168, Number 170 (Friday, October 28, 2022)]
[Extensions of Remarks]
[Pages E1090-E1091]
From the Congressional Record Online through the Government Publishing Office [www.gpo.gov]




                     HONORING LYN HAWTHORNE HOWARD

                                 ______
                                 

                            HON. KEVIN BRADY

                                of texas

                    in the house of representatives

                        Friday, October 28, 2022

  Mr. BRADY. Madam Speaker, I rise to honor the distinguished career 
and public service of my Texas constituent and good friend, Mrs. Lyn 
Hawthorne Howard. Lyn is a cherished business leader, philanthropist, 
community leader, and artist. Passionate about Texas history and 
culture, she has led significant efforts to restore and preserve 
historic buildings and homes in and around Conroe, Texas.
  Lyn was born in Shreveport, Louisiana. But as they say, she ``got to 
Texas as soon as she could.'' She attended Texas Woman's University, 
graduating with a degree in Education. Lyn was also a member of the 
famous Kilgore Rangerettes--one of America's most prestigious dance and 
drill teams. As a Rangerette, Lyn grew a deep appreciation for Texas 
culture as she traveled and performed throughout our great state.
  Lyn is a principled business leader, and her devotion to hard work 
has served as an inspiration to women all over Texas. Lyn broke through 
the glass windshield, becoming the first woman to own and manage a 
successful Toyota dealership. Invited to visit Japan with a group of 
American car dealers, the Toyota Company was surprised to learn there 
was a woman in the group. The company suggested she may be more 
comfortable participating in the tours arranged for ``dealers' wives.'' 
Confidently, Lyn replied, ``no, thank you,'' and reminded her Japanese 
hosts that she too was a car dealer and insisted on attending all the 
meetings with her fellow Toyota auto brokers. Another one of Lyn's 
successful business ventures was her investment in the San Antonio-
based LDS Telecom company. As a result of Lyn's leadership, she led the 
business to become a major telecom company in Texas, and she sold her 
stake in the early 1980s with tremendous results.
  Lyn always puts her community first, playing a vital role in 
preserving Texas's history. Recently, Lyn is devoted to preserving the 
history of Conroe, Texas. She purchased and restored the original home 
of Conroe city founder, Isaac Conroe and has played a leading role in 
several important historic preservation and restoration projects. She 
has long been a leader and organizer of Conroe's annual Founder's Day 
celebration.
  Lyn is also a passionate member of multiple historical preservation 
societies. In 2021, she was recognized as a fifty-year member of the 
Daughters of the Republic of Texas in two chapters: The Alamo Missions 
Chapter and The Judge Nathaniel Hart Davis Chapter.
  Lyn has been involved in beauty pageants for over forty years, 
winning titles of Miss United America Elite 2012 and Miss United Royal 
2013. She is also a talented singer, dancer, and painter. Always 
seeking new artistic challenges, Lyn recently became interested in 
sculpture which has become her latest passion. She has sculpted bronze 
busts of her husband and another bust of President Donald Trump which 
has been displayed in Washington. Currently, she is working on a 
sculpture of Conroe founder Isaac Conroe.

[[Page E1091]]

  For her decades of leadership and service, I am honored to recognize 
and commend Lyn for her many significant contributions to the Conroe 
community and the great state of Texas.

                          ____________________

